---
title: "Nothing I see in this room means anything."
ref: "1"
burl: /acim/intro/workbook/#l1-50
---

<a class="hide-review" href="/t/acim/workbook/l051/#one">Review</a>
{: .omit}

Now look slowly around you, and practice applying this idea very
specifically to whatever you see:

>   &ldquo;This table does not mean anything.&rdquo;<br/>
>   &ldquo;This chair does not mean anything.&rdquo;<br/>
>   &ldquo;This hand does not mean anything.&rdquo;<br/>
>   &ldquo;This foot does not mean anything.&rdquo;<br/>
>   &ldquo;This pen does not mean anything.&rdquo;

Then look farther away from your immediate area, and apply the idea to
a wider range:

>   &ldquo;That door does not mean anything.&rdquo;<br/>
>   &ldquo;That body does not mean anything.&rdquo;<br/>
>   &ldquo;That lamp does not mean anything.&rdquo;<br/>
>   &ldquo;That sign does not mean anything.&rdquo;<br/>
>   &ldquo;That shadow does not mean anything.&rdquo;

Notice that these statements are not arranged in any order, and make no
allowance for differences in the kinds of things to which they are
applied. That is the purpose of the exercise. The statement is merely
applied to anything you see. As you practice applying the idea for the
day, use it totally indiscriminately. Do not attempt to apply it to
everything you see, for these exercises should not become ritualistic.
Only be sure that nothing you see is specifically excluded. One thing is
like another as far as the application of the idea is concerned.

Each of the first three lessons should not be done more than twice a
day, preferably morning and evening. Nor should they be attempted for
more than a minute or so, unless that entails a sense of hurry. A
comfortable sense of leisure is essential.

