---
title: I see no neutral things.
ref: "17"
---

I see no neutral things.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> This idea is another step in the direction of identifying cause and
effect as it really operates. You see no neutral things because you have
no neutral thoughts. It is always the thought that comes first, despite
the temptation to believe that it is really the other way around. This
is not the way the world thinks, but you must learn that it is the way
you think. If it were not so, perception would have no cause and would
itself be the cause of reality. In view of its highly variable nature,
this is hardly likely.

<sup>2</sup> In applying today's idea, say to yourself, with eyes open:

<sup>3</sup> *I see no neutral things because I have no neutral thoughts*.

<sup>4</sup> Then look about you, resting your glance on each thing that catches
your eye long enough to say:

<sup>5</sup> *I do not see a neutral \_\_\_\_\_, because my thoughts<br/>
about \_\_\_\_\_ are not neutral*.

<sup>6</sup> For example, you might say:

<sup>7</sup> *I do not see a neutral wall, because my thoughts<br/>
about walls are not neutral.<br/>
I do not see a neutral body, because my thoughts<br/>
about bodies are not neutral*.

<sup>8</sup> As usual, it is essential to make no distinction between what you
believe to be animate or inanimate, pleasant or unpleasant. Regardless
of what you may believe, you do not see anything which is really alive
and really joyous. That is because you are unaware as yet of any
thoughts which are really true and therefore really happy.

<sup>9</sup> Three or four specific practice periods are recommended and no less
than three are required for maximum benefit even if you experience
resistance. However, if you do, the length of the practice period may be
reduced to less than the minute or so which is otherwise recommended.

