---
title: I am determined to see things differently.
ref: "21"
---

I am determined to see things differently.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> The idea for today is obviously a continuation and extension of the
preceding one. This time, however, specific mind searching periods are
necessary in addition to applying the idea to particular situations as
they arise. Five practice periods are urged, allowing a full minute for
each.

<sup>2</sup> In the practice periods, begin by repeating the idea to yourself. Then
close your eyes and search your mind carefully for situations past,
present or anticipated, which arouse anger in you. The anger may take
the form of any reaction ranging from mild irritation to rage. The
degree of the emotion you experience does not matter. You will become
increasingly aware that a slight twinge of annoyance is nothing but a
veil drawn over intense fury.

<sup>3</sup> Try, therefore, not to let the “little” thoughts of anger escape you
in the practice periods. Remember that you do not really recognize what
arouses anger in you, and nothing that you believe in this connection
means anything. You will probably be tempted to dwell more on some
situations than on others on the fallacious grounds that they are more
“obvious.” This is not so. It is merely an example of the belief that
some forms of attack are more justified than others.

<sup>4</sup> As you search your mind for all the forms in which attack thoughts
present themselves, hold each one in mind and tell yourself:

<sup>5</sup> *I am determined to see \_\_\_\_\_ \[name of person\]
differently.<br/>
I am determined to see \_\_\_\_\_ \[specify the situation\] differently*.

<sup>6</sup> Try to be as specific as possible. You may, for example, focus your
anger on a particular attribute of a particular person, believing that
the anger is limited to this aspect. If your perception of the person is
suffering from this form of distortion, say:

<sup>7</sup> *I am determined to see \_\_\_\_\_ \[specify the<br/>
attribute\] in \_\_\_\_\_ \[name of person\] differently*.

