---
title: Above all else I want to see.
ref: "27"
---

Above all else I want to see.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> Today's idea expresses something stronger than mere determination. It
gives vision priority among your desires. You may feel hesitant about
using the idea on the ground that you are not sure you really mean it.
This does not matter. The purpose of today's exercises is to bring the
time when the idea will be wholly true a little nearer.

<sup>2</sup> There may be a great temptation to believe that some sort of sacrifice
is being asked of you when you say you want to see above all else. If
you become uneasy about the lack of reservation involved, add:

<sup>3</sup> *Vision has no cost to anyone*.

<sup>4</sup> If fear of loss still persists, add further:

<sup>5</sup> *It can only bless*.

<sup>6</sup> The idea for today needs many repetitions for maximum benefit. It
should be used at least every half hour, and more often if possible. You
might try for every 15 or 20 minutes. It is recommended that you set a
definite time interval for using the idea when you wake or shortly
afterwards and attempt to adhere to it throughout the day. It will not
be difficult to do this, even if you are engaged in conversation or
otherwise occupied at the time. You can still repeat one short sentence
to yourself without disturbing anything that is going on.

<sup>7</sup> The real question is how often will you remember? How much do you want
today's idea to be true? Answer one of these questions, and you have
answered the other. You will probably miss several applications and
perhaps quite a number. Do not be disturbed by this, but do try to keep
on your schedule from then on. If only once during the day you feel that
you were perfectly sincere while you were repeating today's idea, you
can be sure that you have saved yourself many years of effort.

