---
title: My holiness blesses the world.
ref: "37"
---

My holiness blesses the world.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> This idea contains the first glimmerings of your true function in the
world or why you are here. Your purpose is to see the world through your
own holiness. Thus are you and the world blessed together. No one loses;
nothing is taken away from anyone; everyone gains through your holy
vision. It signifies the end of sacrifice because it offers everyone his
full due. And he is entitled to everything because it is his birthright
as a Son of God.

<sup>2</sup> There is no other way in which the idea of sacrifice can be removed
from the world's thinking. Any other way of seeing will inevitably
demand payment of someone or something. As a result, the perceiver will
lose. Nor will he have any idea why he is losing. Yet is his wholeness
restored to his awareness through your vision. Your holiness blesses him
by asking nothing of him. Those who see themselves as whole make no
demands.

<sup>3</sup> Your holiness is the salvation of the world. It lets you teach the
world that it is one with you, not by preaching to it, not by telling it
anything, but merely by your quiet recognition that in your holiness are
all things blessed, along with you.

<sup>4</sup> Today's four longer exercise periods, each to involve three to five
minutes of practice, begin with the repetition of the idea for today
followed by a minute or so of looking about you as you apply the idea to
whatever you see:

<sup>5</sup> *My holiness blesses this chair.<br/>
My holiness blesses that window.<br/>
My holiness blesses this body*.

<sup>6</sup> Then close your eyes and apply the idea to any person who occurs to
you, using his name and saying:

<sup>7</sup> *My holiness blesses you, \[name\]*.

<sup>8</sup> You may continue the practice period with your eyes closed; you may
open your eyes again and apply the idea for today to your outer world if
you so desire; you may alternate between applying the idea to what you
see around you and to those who are in your thoughts; or you may use any
combination of these two phases of application which you prefer. The
practice period should conclude with a repetition of the idea with your
eyes closed and another following immediately with your eyes open.

<sup>9</sup> The shorter exercises consist of repeating the idea as often as you
can. It is particularly helpful to apply it silently to anyone you meet,
using his name as you do so. It is essential to use the idea if anyone
seems to cause an adverse reaction in you. Offer him the blessing of
your holiness immediately that you may learn to keep it in your own
awareness.

