---
title: I am blessed as a Son of God.
ref: "40"
---

I am blessed as a Son of God.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> Today we will begin to assert some of the happy things to which you
are entitled, being what you are. No long practice periods are required
today, but very frequent short ones are necessary. Once every ten
minutes would be highly desirable, and you are urged to attempt this
schedule and to adhere to it whenever possible. If you forget, try
again. If there are long interruptions, try again. Whenever you
remember, try again.

<sup>2</sup> You need not close your eyes for the exercise periods, although you
will probably find it more helpful if you do. However, you may be in a
number of situations during the day when closing your eyes would not be
appropriate. Do not miss a practice period because of this. You can
practice quite well under almost any circumstance, if you really want
to.

<sup>3</sup> Today's exercises take little time and no effort. Repeat today's idea,
and then add several of the attributes which you associate with being a
Son of God, applying them to yourself. One practice period might, for
example, consist of the following:

<sup>4</sup> *I am blessed as a Son of God.<br/>
I am happy, peaceful, loving, and contented*.

<sup>5</sup> Another might be something as follows:

<sup>6</sup> *I am blessed as a Son of God.<br/>
I am calm, quiet, assured, and confident*.

<sup>7</sup> If only a brief period is available, merely telling yourself that you
are blessed as a Son of God will do.

