---
title: "Review Lessons 36 - 40"
ref: "58"
---

<sup>1</sup> These ideas are for review today:

\[36\] My holiness envelops everything I see.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>2</sup> From my holiness does the perception of the real world
come. Having forgiven, I no longer see myself as guilty. I can accept
the innocence that is the truth about me. Seen through understanding
eyes, the holiness of the world is all I see, for I can picture only the
thoughts I hold about myself.

\[37\] My holiness blesses the world.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>3</sup> The perception of my holiness does not bless me alone.
Everyone and everything I see in its light shares in the joy it brings
to me. There is nothing that is apart from this joy because there is
nothing that does not share my holiness. As I recognize my holiness, so
does the holiness of the world shine forth for everyone to see.

\[38\] There is nothing my holiness cannot do.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>4</sup> My holiness is unlimited in its power to heal because it is
unlimited in its power to save. What is there to be saved from except
illusions?  And what are all illusions except false ideas about myself?
My holiness undoes them all by asserting the truth about me. In the
presence of my holiness, which I share with God Himself, all idols
vanish.

\[39\] My holiness is my salvation.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>5</sup> Since my holiness saves me from all guilt, recognizing my
holiness is recognizing my salvation. It is also recognizing the
salvation of the world. Once I have accepted my holiness, nothing can
make me afraid. And because I am unafraid, everyone must share in my
understanding, which is the gift of God to me and to the world.

\[40\] I am blessed as a Son of God.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>6</sup> Herein lies my claim to all good and only good. I am
blessed as a Son of God. All good things are mine because God intended
them for me. I cannot suffer any loss or deprivation or pain because of
who I am. My Father supports me, protects me, and directs me in all
things. His care for me is infinite and is with me forever. I am
eternally blessed as His Son.

