---
title: "The light of the world brings peace to<br/>&nbsp;&nbsp;every mind through my forgiveness."
ref: "63"
---

The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my forgiveness.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> How holy are you who have the power to bring peace to every mind! How
blessed are you who can learn to recognize the means for letting this be
done through you! What purpose could you have that would bring you
greater happiness?

<sup>2</sup> You are indeed the light of the world with such a function. The Son of
God looks to you for his redemption. It is yours to give him, for it
belongs to you. Accept no trivial purpose or meaningless desire in its
place or you will forget your function and leave the Son of God in hell.
This is no idle request that is being asked of you. You are asked to
accept salvation that it may be yours to give.

<sup>3</sup> Recognizing the importance of this function, we will be happy to
remember it very often today. We will begin the day by acknowledging it
and close the day with the thought of it in our awareness. And
throughout the day, we will repeat this as often as we can:

<sup>4</sup> *The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my
forgiveness.<br/>
I am the means God has appointed for the salvation of the world.*

<sup>5</sup> If you can close your eyes, you will probably find it easier to let
related thoughts come to you in the minute or two which you should
devote to considering this. Do not, however, wait for such an
opportunity. No chance should be lost for reinforcing today's idea.

<sup>6</sup> Remember that God's Son looks to you for his salvation. And who but
your Self must be His Son?

