---
title: Review Lessons 69 - 70
ref: "85"
---

<sup>1</sup> Today's review will cover these ideas:

\[69\] My grievances hide the light of the world in me.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>2</sup> My grievances show me what is not there and hide from me
what I would see. Recognizing this, what do I want my grievances for?
They keep me in darkness and hide the light. Grievances and light cannot
go together, but light and vision must be joined for me to see. To see,
I must lay grievances aside. I want to see, and this will be the means
by which I will succeed.

<sup>3</sup> Specific applications of this idea might be made in these
forms:

<sup>4</sup> *Let me not use this as a block to sight.<br/> The light of
the world will shine all this away.<br/> I have no need for this. I want
to see*.

\[70\] My salvation comes from me.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>5</sup> Today I will recognize where my salvation is. It is in me
because its Source is there. It has not left its Source, and so it
cannot have left my mind. I will not look for it outside myself. It is
not found outside and then brought in. But from within me it will reach
beyond, and everything I see will but reflect the light that shines in
me and in itself.

<sup>6</sup> These forms of the idea are suitable for more specific
application:

<sup>7</sup> *Let this not tempt me to look away from me for my
salvation.<br/> I will not let this interfere with my<br/> awareness of
the Source of my salvation.<br/> This has no power to remove salvation
from me.*

