---
title: "Review Lessons 71 - 72"
ref: "86"
burl: /acim/intro/workbook/#r2
---

These ideas are for review today:

[*71*](/workbook/l071/?r=1) **“Only God’s plan for salvation will work.”**
{: #l071}

It is senseless for me to search wildly about for salvation. I have seen
it in many people and in many things, but when I reached for it, it was
not there. I was mistaken about where it is. I was mistaken about what
it is. I will undertake no more idle seeking. Only God’s plan for
salvation will work. And I will rejoice because His plan can never fail.

These are some suggested forms for applying this idea specifically:

> “God’s plan for salvation will save me from my perception of this.”<br/>
> “This is no exception in God’s plan for my salvation.”<br/>
> “Let me perceive this only in the light of God’s plan for salvation.”

[*72*](/workbook/l072/?r=1) **“Holding grievances is an attack on God’s plan for salvation.”**
{: #l072}

Holding grievances is an attempt to prove that God’s plan for salvation
will not work. Yet only His plan will work. By holding grievances, I am
therefore excluding my only hope of salvation from my awareness. I would
no longer defeat my own best interests in this insane way. I would
accept God’s plan for salvation, and be happy.

Specific applications for this idea might be in these forms:

> “I am choosing between misperception and salvation as I look on this.”<br/>
> “If I see grounds for grievances in this, I will not see the grounds for my salvation.”<br/>
> “This calls for salvation, not attack.”

