---
title: Review Lessons 77 - 78
ref: "89"
---

<sup>1</sup> These are our review ideas for today:

\[77\] I am entitled to miracles.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>2</sup> I am entitled to miracles because I am under no laws but
God's. His laws release me from all grievances and replace them with
miracles. And I would accept the miracles in place of the grievances,
which are but illusions that hide the miracles beyond. Now I would
accept only what the laws of God entitle me to have that I may use it on
behalf of the function He has given me.

<sup>3</sup> You might use these suggestions for specific applications
of this idea:

<sup>4</sup> *Behind this is a miracle to which I am entitled.<br/> Let
me not hold a grievance against you \[name\],<br/> but offer you the
miracle that belongs to you instead.<br/> Seen truly, this offers me a
miracle*.

\[78\] Let miracles replace all grievances.
{: .review-lesson}

<sup>5</sup> By this idea do I unite my will with the Holy Spirit's and
perceive them as one. By this idea do I accept my release from hell. By
this idea do I express my willingness to have all my illusions be
replaced with truth according to God's plan for my salvation. I would
make no exceptions and no substitutes. I want all of Heaven and only
Heaven, as God wills me to have.

<sup>6</sup> Useful specific forms for applying this idea would be:

<sup>7</sup> *I would not hold this grievance apart from my
salvation.<br/> Let our grievances be replaced by miracles,
\[name\].<br/> Beyond this is the miracle by which all my grievances are
replaced*.

