---
title: I am as God created me.
ref: "94"
---

I am as God created me.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> Today we continue with the one idea which brings complete
salvation; the one statement which makes all forms of temptation
powerless; the one thought which renders the ego silent and entirely
undone. You are as God created you. The sounds of this world are still,
the sights of this world disappear, and all the thoughts that this world
ever held are wiped away forever by this one idea. Here is salvation
accomplished. Here is sanity restored.

<sup>2</sup> True light is strength, and strength is sinlessness. If you
remain as God created you, you must be strong and light must be in you.
He Who ensured your sinlessness must be the guarantee of strength and
light as well. You are as God created you. Darkness cannot obscure the
glory of the Son of God. You stand in light, strong in the sinlessness
in which you were created and in which you will remain throughout
eternity.

<sup>3</sup> Today we will again devote the first five minutes of each
waking hour to the attempt to feel the truth in you. Begin these times
of searching with these words:

<sup>4</sup> *I am as God created me.<br/>
I am His Son eternally.*

<sup>5</sup> Now try to reach the Son of God in you. This is the Self
that never sinned nor made an image to replace reality. This is the Self
which never left its home in God to walk the world uncertainly. This is
the Self which knows no fear nor could conceive of loss or suffering or
death.

<sup>6</sup> Nothing is required of you to reach this goal except to lay
all idols and self-images aside, go past the long list of attributes,
both “good” and “bad,” you have ascribed to yourself and wait in silent
expectancy for the truth. God has Himself promised that it will be
revealed to all who ask for it. You are asking now. You cannot fail
because He cannot fail.

<sup>7</sup> If you do not meet the requirement of practicing for the
first five minutes of every hour, at least remind yourself hourly:

<sup>8</sup> *I am as God created me.<br/>
I am His Son eternally.*

<sup>9</sup> Tell yourself frequently today that you are as God created
you. And be sure to respond to anyone who seems to irritate you with
these words:

<sup>10</sup> *You are as God created you.<br/>
You are His Son eternally.*

<sup>11</sup> Make every effort to do the hourly exercises today. Each
one you do will be a giant stride toward your release and a milestone in
learning the thought system which this course sets forth.

