---
title: I share God’s Will for happiness for me.
ref: "102"
---

I share God's Will for happiness for me.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> You do not want to suffer. You may think it buys you
something and may still believe a little that it buys you what you want.
Yet this belief is surely shaken now, at least enough to let you
question it and to suspect it really makes no sense. It has not gone as
yet but lacks the roots that once secured it tightly to the dark and
hidden secret places of your mind.

<sup>2</sup> Today we try to loose its weakened hold still further. And
to realize that pain is purposeless, without a cause, and with no power
to accomplish anything. It cannot purchase anything at all. It offers
nothing and does not exist. And everything you think it offers you is
lacking in existence like itself. You have been slave to nothing. Be you
free today to join the happy Will of God.

<sup>3</sup> For several days we will continue to devote our longer
practice periods to exercises planned to help you reach the happiness
God's Will has placed in you. Here is your home, and here your safety
is. Here is your peace, and here there is no fear. Here is salvation.
Here is rest at last.

<sup>4</sup> Begin the longer practice periods today with this
acceptance of God's Will for you:

<sup>5</sup> *I share God's Will for happiness for me,<br/>
And I accept it as my function now.*

<sup>6</sup> Then seek this function deep within your mind, for it is
there, awaiting but your choice. You cannot fail to find it when you
learn it is your choice and that you share God's Will.

<sup>7</sup> Be happy, for your only function here is happiness. You
have no need to be less loving to God's Son than He Whose Love created
him as loving as Himself. Besides these hourly five minute rests, pause
frequently today to tell yourself that you have now accepted happiness
as your one function. And be sure that you are joining with God's Will
in doing this.

