---
title: God, being Love, is also happiness.
ref: "103"
---

God, being Love, is also happiness.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> Happiness is an attribute of love. It cannot be apart from
it, nor can it be experienced where love is not. Love has no limits,
being everywhere. And therefore joy is everywhere as well. Yet can the
mind deny that this is so, believing there are gaps in love where sin
can enter, bringing pain instead of joy.

<sup>2</sup> This strange belief would limit happiness by redefining
love as limited and introducing opposition in what has no limit and no
opposite. Fear is associated then with love, and its results become the
heritage of minds that think what they have made is real. These images,
with no reality in truth, bear witness to the fear of God, forgetting
being Love, He must be joy.

<sup>3</sup> This basic error we will try again to bring to truth today
and teach ourselves:

<sup>4</sup> *God, being Love, is also happiness.<br/>
To fear Him is to be afraid of joy.*

<sup>5</sup> Begin your periods of practicing today with this
association, which corrects the false belief that God is fear. It also
emphasizes happiness belongs to you because of what He is.

<sup>6</sup> Allow this one correction to be placed within your mind
each waking hour today. Then welcome all the happiness it brings, as
truth replaces fear, and joy becomes what you expect to take the place
of pain. God being Love, it will be given you. Bolster this expectation
frequently throughout the day, and quiet all your fears with this
assurance, kind and wholly true:

<sup>7</sup> *God, being Love, is also happiness.<br/>
And it is happiness I seek today.<br/>
I cannot fail because I seek the truth.*

