---
title: Forgiveness offers everything I want.
ref: "122"
---

Forgiveness offers everything I want.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> What could you want forgiveness cannot give? Do you want
peace? Forgiveness offers it. Do you want happiness, a quiet mind, a
certainty of purpose, and a sense of worth and beauty that transcends
the world? Do you want care and safety and the warmth of sure protection
always? Do you want a quietness that cannot be disturbed, a gentleness
that never can be hurt, a deep, abiding comfort, and a rest so perfect
it can never be upset?

<sup>2</sup> All this forgiveness offers you, and more. It sparkles in
your eyes as you awake and gives you joy with which to meet the day. It
soothes your forehead while you sleep and rests upon your eyelids so you
see no dreams of fear and evil, malice, and attack. And when you wake
again, it offers you another day of happiness and peace. All this
forgiveness offers you, and more.

<sup>3</sup> Forgiveness lets the veil be lifted up which hides the face
of Christ from those who look with unforgiving eyes upon the world. It
lets you recognize the Son of God and clears your memory of all dead
thoughts so that remembrance of your Father can arise across the
threshold of your mind.

<sup>4</sup> What would you want forgiveness cannot give? What gifts but
these are worthy to be sought? What fancied value, trivial effect, or
transient promise never to be kept can hold more hope than what
forgiveness brings? Why would you seek an answer other than the answer
that will answer everything? Here is the perfect answer, given to
imperfect questions, meaningless requests, half-hearted willingness to
hear, and less than halfway diligence and partial trust.

<sup>5</sup> Here is the answer! Seek for it no more. You will not find
another one instead. God's plan for your salvation cannot change, nor
can it fail. Be thankful it remains exactly as He planned it.
Changelessly it stands before you, like an open door with warmth and
welcome calling from beyond the doorway, bidding you to enter in and
make yourself at home where you belong.

<sup>6</sup> Here is the answer! Would you stand outside while all of
Heaven waits for you within? Forgive and be forgiven. As you give, you
will receive. There is no plan but this for the salvation of the Son of
God. Let us today rejoice that this is so, for here we have an answer,
clear and plain, beyond deceit in its simplicity. All the complexities
the world has spun of fragile cobwebs disappear before the power and the
majesty of this extremely simple statement of the truth.

<sup>7</sup> Here is the answer! Do not turn away in aimless wandering
again. Accept salvation now. It is the gift of God and not the world.
The world can give no gifts of any value to a mind which has received
what God has given as its own. God wills salvation be received today and
that the intricacies of your dreams no longer hide their nothingness
from you.

<sup>8</sup> Open your eyes today, and look upon a happy world of safety
and of peace. Forgiveness is the means by which it comes to take the
place of hell. In quietness it rises up to greet your open eyes and fill
your heart with deep tranquility as ancient truths, forever newly born,
arise in your awareness. What you will remember then can never be
described. Yet your forgiveness offers it to you.

<sup>9</sup> Remembering the gifts forgiveness gives, we undertake our
practicing today with hope and faith that this will be the day salvation
will be ours. Earnestly and gladly will we seek for it today, aware we
hold the key within our hands, accepting Heaven's answer to the hell we
made, but where we would remain no more.

<sup>10</sup> Morning and evening do we gladly give a quarter of an hour
to the search in which the end of hell is guaranteed. Begin in
hopefulness, for we have reached the turning point at which the road
becomes far easier. And now the way is short that yet we travel. We are
close indeed to the appointed ending of the dream.

<sup>11</sup> Sink into happiness as you begin these practice periods,
for they hold out the sure rewards of questions answered, and what your
acceptance of the answer brings. Today it will be given you to feel the
peace forgiveness offers and the joy the lifting of the veil holds out
to you.

<sup>12</sup> Before the light you will receive today the world will
fade until it disappears, and you will see another world arise you have
no words to picture. Now we walk directly into light, and we receive the
gifts which have been held in store for us since time began, kept
waiting for today. Forgiveness offers everything you want. Today all
things you want are given you.

<sup>13</sup> Let not your gifts recede throughout the day, as you
return again to meet a world of shifting change and bleak appearances.
Retain your gifts in clear awareness as you see the changeless in the
heart of change, the light of truth behind appearances. Be tempted not
to let your gifts slip by and drift into forgetfulness but hold them
firmly in your mind by your attempts to think of them at least a minute
as each quarter of an hour passes by.

<sup>14</sup> Remind yourself how precious are these gifts with this
reminder, which has power to hold your gifts in your awareness through
the day:

<sup>15</sup> *Forgiveness offers everything I want.<br/>
Today I have accepted this as true.<br/>
Today I have received the gifts of God*.

