---
title: All things are echoes of the Voice of God.
ref: "151"
---

All things are echoes of the Voice of God.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> No one can judge on partial evidence. That is not judgment.
It is merely an opinion based on ignorance and doubt. Its seeming
certainty is but a cloak for the uncertainty it would conceal. It needs
irrational defense because it is irrational. And its defense seems
strong, convincing, and without a doubt because of all the doubting
underneath.

<sup>2</sup> You do not seem to doubt the world you see. You do not
really question what is shown you through the body's eyes. Nor do you
ask why you believe it, even though you learned a long while since your
senses do deceive. That you believe them to the last detail which they
report is even stranger when you pause to recollect how frequently they
have been faulty witnesses indeed! Why would you trust them so
implicitly? Why but because of underlying doubt which you would hide
with show of certainty?

<sup>3</sup> How can you judge? Your judgment rests upon the witness
that your senses offer you. Yet witness never falser was than this. But
how else do you judge the world you see? You place pathetic faith in
what your eyes and ears report. You think your fingers touch reality and
close upon the truth. This is awareness which you understand and think
more real than what is witnessed to by the eternal Voice of God Himself.

<sup>4</sup> Can this be judgment? You have often been urged to refrain
from judging, not because it is a right to be withheld from you. You
cannot judge. You merely can believe the ego's judgments, all of which
are false. It guides your senses carefully, to prove how weak you are,
how helpless and afraid, how apprehensive of just punishment, how black
with sin, how wretched in your guilt.

<sup>5</sup> This thing it speaks of and would yet defend it tells you
is yourself. And you believe that this is so with stubborn certainty.
Yet underneath remains the hidden doubt that what it shows you as
reality with such conviction it does not believe. It is itself alone
that it condemns. It is within itself it sees the guilt. It is its own
despair it sees in you.

<sup>6</sup> Hear not its voice. The witnesses it sends to prove to you
its evil is your own are false and speak with certainty of what they do
not know. Your faith in them is blind because you would not share the
doubts their lord cannot completely vanquish. You believe to doubt his
vassals is to doubt yourself. Yet you must learn to doubt their evidence
will clear the way to recognize yourself and let the Voice for God alone
be Judge of what is worthy of your own belief.

<sup>7</sup> He will not tell you that your brother should be judged by
what your eyes behold in him, nor what his body's mouth says to your
ears, nor what your fingers' touch reports of him. He passes by such
idle witnesses, which merely bear false witness to God's Son. He
recognizes only what God loves, and in the holy light of what He sees do
all the ego's dreams of what you are vanish before the splendor He
beholds.

<sup>8</sup> Let Him be judge of what you are, for He has certainty in
which there is no doubt, because it rests on certainty so great that
doubt is meaningless before Its face. Christ cannot doubt Himself. The
Voice of God can only honor Him, rejoicing in His perfect, everlasting
sinlessness. Whom He has judged can only laugh at guilt, unwilling now
to play with toys of sin, unheeding of the body's witnesses before the
rapture of His holy face.

<sup>9</sup> And thus He judges you. Accept His word of what you are,
for He bears witness to your beautiful creation and the Mind Whose
thought created your reality. What can the body mean to Him Who knows
the glory of the Father and the Son? What whispers of the ego can He
hear? What could convince Him that your sins are real?

<sup>10</sup> Let Him be judge as well of everything that seems to
happen to you in this world. His lessons will enable you to bridge the
gap between illusions and the truth. He will remove all faith that you
have placed in pain, disaster, suffering, and loss. He gives you vision
which can look beyond these grim appearances and can behold the gentle
face of Christ in all of them. You will no longer doubt that only good
can come to you who are beloved of God, for He will judge all happenings
and teach the single lesson which they all contain.

<sup>11</sup> He will select the elements in them that represent the
truth and disregard those aspects which reflect but idle dreams. And He
will reinterpret all you see and all occurrences, each circumstance, and
every happening which seems to touch on you in any way from His one
frame of reference, wholly unified and sure. And you will see the love
beyond the hate, the constancy in change, the pure in sin, and only
Heaven's blessing on the world.

<sup>12</sup> Such is your resurrection, for your life is not a part of
anything you see. It stands beyond the body and the world, past every
witness for unholiness, within the Holy, holy as Itself. In everyone and
everything, His Voice would speak to you of nothing but your Self and
your Creator, Who is one with Him. So will you see the holy face of
Christ in everything and hear in everything no sound except the echo of
God's Voice.

<sup>13</sup> We practice wordlessly today, except at the beginning of
the time you spend with God. We introduce these times with but a single,
slow repeating of the thought with which the day begins. And then we
watch our thoughts, appealing silently to Him Who sees the elements of
truth in them. Let Him evaluate each thought that comes to mind, remove
the elements of dreams, and give them back to you as clean ideas that do
not contradict the Will of God.

<sup>14</sup> Give Him your thoughts, and He will give them back as
miracles which joyously proclaim the wholeness and the happiness God
wills His Son as proof of His eternal Love. And as each thought is thus
transformed, it takes on healing power from the Mind Which saw the truth
in it and failed to be deceived by what was falsely added. All the
threads of fantasy are gone, and what remains is unified into a perfect
thought that offers its perfection everywhere.

<sup>15</sup> Spend 15 minutes thus when you awake, and gladly give
another 15 more before you go to sleep. Your ministry begins as all your
thoughts are purified. So are you taught to teach the Son of God the
holy lesson of his sanctity. No one can fail to listen when you hear the
Voice for God give honor to God's Son. And everyone will share the
thoughts with you which He has retranslated in your mind.

<sup>16</sup> Such is your Eastertide. And so you lay the gift of
snow-white lilies on the world, replacing witnesses to sin and death.
Through your transfiguration is the world redeemed and joyfully released
from guilt. Now do we lift our resurrected minds in gladness and in
gratitude to Him Who has restored our sanity to us.

<sup>17</sup> And we will hourly remember Him Who is salvation and
deliverance. As we give thanks the world unites with us and happily
accepts our holy thoughts which Heaven has corrected and made pure. Now
has our ministry begun at last, to carry round the world the joyous news
that truth has no illusions and the peace of God, through us, belongs to
everyone.

