---
title: I feel the Love of God within me now.
ref: "189"
---

I feel the Love of God within me now.
{: .lesson-header}

<sup>1</sup> There is a light in you the world cannot perceive. And with
its eyes you will not see this light, for you are blinded by the world.
Yet you have eyes to see it. It is there for you to look upon. It was
not placed in you to be kept hidden from your sight. This light is a
reflection of the thought we practice now. To feel the Love of God
within you is to see the world anew, shining in innocence, alive with
hope, and blessed with perfect charity and love.

<sup>2</sup> Who could feel fear in such a world as this? It welcomes
you, rejoices that you came, and sings your praises as it keeps you safe
from every form of danger and of pain. It offers you a warm and gentle
home in which to stay a while. It blesses you throughout the day and
watches through the night as silent guardian of your holy sleep. It sees
salvation in you and protects the light in you in which it sees its own.
It offers you its flowers and its snow in thankfulness for your
benevolence.

<sup>3</sup> This is the world the Love of God reveals. It is so
different from the world you see through darkened eyes of malice and of
fear that one belies the other. Only one can be perceived at all. The
other one is wholly meaningless. A world in which forgiveness shines on
everything and peace offers its gentle light to everyone is
inconceivable to those who see a world of hatred, rising from attack,
poised to avenge, to murder and destroy.

<sup>4</sup> Yet is the world of hatred equally unseen and inconceivable
to those who feel God's Love in them. Their world reflects the quietness
and peace that shines in them, the gentleness and innocence they see
surrounding them, the joy with which they look out from the endless
wells of joy within. What they have felt in them they look upon and see
its sure reflection everywhere.

<sup>5</sup> What would you see? The choice is given you. But learn and
do not let your mind forget this law of seeing: you will look upon that
which you feel within. If hatred finds a place within your heart, you
will perceive a fearful world, held cruelly in death's sharp-pointed,
bony fingers. If you feel the Love of God within you, you look out upon
a world of mercy and of love.

<sup>6</sup> Today we pass illusions as we seek to reach to what is true
in us and feel Its all-embracing tenderness, Its Love Which knows us
perfect as Itself, Its sight which is the gift Its Love bestows on us.
We learn the way today. It is as sure as Love Itself, to Which it
carries us. For its simplicity avoids the snares the foolish
convolutions of the world's apparent reasoning but serve to hide.

<sup>7</sup> Simply do this: be still and lay aside all thoughts of what
you are and what God is, all concepts you have learned about the world,
all images you hold about yourself. Empty your mind of everything it
thinks is either true or false or good or bad, of every thought it
judges worthy and all the ideas of which it is ashamed. Hold onto
nothing. Do not bring with you one thought the past has taught nor one
belief you ever learned before from anything. Forget this world, forget
this course, and come with wholly empty hands unto your God.

<sup>8</sup> Is it not He Who knows the way to you? You need not know
the way to Him. Your part is simply to allow all obstacles that you have
interposed between the Son and God the Father to be quietly removed
forever. God will do His part in joyful and immediate response. Ask and
receive. But do not make demands nor point the road to God by which He
should appear to you. The way to reach Him is merely to let Him be. For
in that way is your reality acclaimed as well.

<sup>9</sup> And so today we do not choose the way in which we go to
Him. But we do choose to let Him come. And with this choice we rest. And
in our quiet hearts and open minds His love will blaze its pathway of
itself. What has not been denied is surely there if it be true, and can
be surely reached. God knows His Son and knows the way to him. He does
not need His Son to show Him how to find His way. Through every opened
door His love shines outward from its home within and lightens up the
world in innocence.

<sup>10</sup> *Father, we do not know the way to You. But we have
called, and You have answered us. We will not interfere. Salvation's
ways are not our own, for they belong to You. And it is unto You we look
for them. Our hands are open to receive Your gifts. We have no thoughts
we think apart from You and cherish no beliefs of what we are or who
created us. Yours is the way that we would find and follow. And we ask
but that Your Will, which is our own as well, be done in us and in the
world, that it becomes a part of Heaven now. Amen*.

