---
chapter: Twenty Seven
ctitle: The Body and the Dream*
title: The Healing Example
ref: Tx.27.VI
---

<sup>44</sup> The only way to heal is to be healed. The miracle extends without
your help, but you *are* needed that it can begin. Accept the miracle of
healing, and it will go forth because of what it *is*. It is its nature
to extend itself the instant it is born. And it is born the instant it
is offered and *received*. No one can ask another to be healed. But he
can let *himself* be healed and thus offer the other what he has
received. Who can bestow upon another what he does not have? And who can
share what he denies himself? The Holy Spirit speaks to *you*. He does
not speak to someone else. Yet by your listening, His Voice extends
because you have *accepted* what He says.

<sup>45</sup> Health is the witness unto health. As long as it is unattested, it
remains without conviction. Only when demonstrated has it been proved
and *must* compel belief. No one is healed through double messages. If
you wish only to be healed, you heal. Your *single* purpose makes this
possible. But if you are afraid of healing, then it cannot come through
you. The only thing that is required for a healing is a lack of fear.
The fearful are not healed and cannot heal. This does not mean the
conflict must be gone forever from your mind. For if it were, there'd be
no need for healing then. But it *does* mean, if only for an instant,
you love without attack. An instant is sufficient. Miracles wait not on
time.

<sup>46</sup> The holy instant is the miracle's abiding-place. From there each one
is born into this world as witness to a state of mind which has
transcended conflict and has reached to peace. It carries comfort from
the place of peace into the battleground and demonstrates that war has
no effects. For all the hurt that war has sought to bring, the broken
bodies, and the shattered limbs, the screaming dying and the silent
dead, are gently lifted up and comforted. There *is* no sadness where a
miracle has come to heal. And nothing more than just *one* instant of
your love without attack is necessary that all this occur. In that one
instant are you healed, and in that single instant is all healing done.

<sup>47</sup> What stands apart from you when you accept the blessing that the holy
instant brings? Be not afraid of blessing, for the One Who blesses you
loves all the world and leaves nothing within the world that could be
feared. But if you shrink from blessing will the world indeed seem
fearful, for you have withheld its peace and comfort, leaving it to die.
Would not a world so bitterly bereft be looked on as a condemnation by
the one who could have saved it but stepped back because he was afraid
of being healed? The eyes of all the dying bring reproach, and suffering
whispers, “What is there to fear?” Consider well its question. It is
asked of you on your behalf. A dying world asks only that you rest an
instant from attack upon yourself, that it be healed.

<sup>48</sup> Come to the holy instant and be healed, for nothing that is there
received is left behind on your returning to the world. And being
blessed, you will bring blessing. Life is given you to give the dying
world. And suffering eyes no longer will accuse, but shine in thanks to
you who blessing gave. The holy instant's radiance will light your eyes
and give them sight to see beyond all suffering and see Christ's face
instead. Healing *replaces* suffering. Who looks on one cannot perceive
the other, for they cannot both be there. And what you see the world
will witness, and will witness *to*.

<sup>49</sup> Thus is your healing everything the world requires that it may be
healed. It needs *one* lesson which has perfectly been learned. And then
when you forget it will the world remind you gently of what you have
taught. No reinforcement will its thanks withhold from you who let
yourself be healed that it might live. It will call forth its witnesses
to show the face of Christ to you who brought the sight to them by which
they witnessed it. The world of accusation is replaced by one in which
all eyes look lovingly upon the Friend who brought them their release.
And happily your brother will perceive the many friends he thought were
enemies.

<sup>50</sup> Problems are not specific, but they take specific forms, and these
specific shapes make up the world. And no one understands the nature of
his problem. If he did, it would be there no more for him to see. Its
very nature is that it is *not*. And thus while he perceives it, he can
*not* perceive it as it is. But healing is apparent in specific
instances and generalizes to include them all. This is because they
really are the same despite their different forms. All learning aims at
transfer, which becomes complete within two situations which are seen as
one, for *only* common elements are there. Yet this can only be attained
by One Who does not see the differences you see. The total transfer of
your learning is not made by you. But that it has been made in spite of
all the differences you see convinces you that they could not be real.

<sup>51</sup> Your healing will extend and will be brought to problems that you
thought were not your own. And it will also be apparent that your many
different problems will be solved as any one of them has been escaped.
It cannot be their differences which made this possible, for learning
does not jump from situations to their opposites and bring the same
results. All healing must proceed in lawful manner in accord with laws
which have been properly perceived but never violated. Fear you not the
way that you perceive them. You are wrong, but there is One within you
Who is *right*.

<sup>52</sup> Leave, then, the transfer of your learning to the One Who really
understands its laws and Who will guarantee that they remain unviolated
and unlimited. Your part is merely to apply what He has taught you to
*yourself*, and He will do the rest. And thus the power of your learning
will be proved to you by all the many different witnesses it finds. Your
brother first among them will be seen, but thousands stand behind him,
and beyond each one there are a thousand more. Each one may seem to have
a problem which is different from the rest. Yet they are solved
together. And their common answer shows the questions could not have
been separate.

<sup>53</sup> Peace be to you to whom is healing offered. And you will learn that
peace is given you when you accept the healing for yourself. Its total
value need not be appraised by you to let you understand that you have
benefited from it. What occurred within the instant which love entered
in without attack will stay with you forever. Your healing will be one
of its effects, as will your brother's. Everywhere you go will you
behold its multiplied effects. Yet all the witnesses that you behold
will be far less than all there really are. Infinity cannot be
understood by merely counting up its separate parts. God thanks you for
your healing, for He knows it is a gift of love unto His Son, and
therefore is it given unto Him.

