---
chapter: Twenty Seven
ctitle: The Body and the Dream*
title: The Fear of Healing
ref: Tx.27.III
---

<sup>13</sup> Is healing frightening? To many, yes. For accusation is a bar to
love, and damaged bodies are accusers. They stand firmly in the way of
trust and peace, proclaiming that the frail can have no trust and that
the damaged have no grounds for peace. Who has been injured by his
brother and could love and trust him still? He has attacked and will
attack again. Protect him not, because your damaged body shows that you
must be protected from him. To forgive may be an act of charity, but not
his due. He may be pitied for his guilt, but not exonerated. And if you
forgive him his transgressions, you but add to all the guilt that he has
really earned.

<sup>14</sup> The unhealed *cannot* pardon. For they are the witnesses that pardon
is unfair. They would retain the consequences of the guilt they
overlook. Yet no one can forgive a sin which he believes is real. And
what has consequences *must* be real because what it has done is there
to see. Forgiveness is not pity which but seeks to pardon what it knows
to be the truth. Good cannot *be* returned for evil, for forgiveness
does not first establish sin and *then* forgive it. Who can say and
mean, “My brother, you have injured me, and yet because I am the better
of the two, I pardon you my hurt.” His pardon and your hurt cannot exist
together. One denies the other and *must* make it false.

<sup>15</sup> To witness sin and yet forgive it is a paradox which reason cannot
see. For it maintains what has been done to you deserves no pardon. And
by giving it, you grant your brother mercy but retain the proof he is
not really innocent. The sick remain accusers. They cannot forgive their
brothers and themselves as well. For no one in whom true forgiveness
reigns can suffer. He holds not the proof of sin before his brother's
eyes. And thus he must have overlooked it and removed it from his own.
Forgiveness cannot be for one and not the other. Who forgives *is*
healed. And in his healing lies the proof that he has truly pardoned and
retains no trace of condemnation that he still would hold against
himself or any living thing.

<sup>16</sup> Forgiveness is not real *unless* it brings a healing to your brother
*and* yourself. You must attest his sins had no effect on you to
demonstrate they were not real. How else could he be guiltless? And how
could his innocence be justified unless his sins have no effect to
warrant guilt? Sins are beyond forgiveness just because they would
entail effects which cannot be undone and overlooked entirely. In their
undoing lies the proof that they were merely errors. *Let* yourself be
healed that you may be forgiving, offering salvation to your brother and
yourself. A broken body shows the mind has not been healed. A miracle of
healing proves that separation is without effect. What you would prove
to him, you will believe. The power of witness *comes* from your belief.
And everything you say or do or think but testifies to what you teach to
him.

<sup>17</sup> Your body can be means to teach that it has never suffered pain
because of him. And in its healing can it offer him mute testimony of
his innocence. It is this testimony which can speak with power greater
than a thousand tongues. For here is his forgiveness *proved* to him. A
miracle can offer nothing less to him than it has given unto you. So
does your healing show your mind is healed and has forgiven what he did
not do. And so is he convinced his innocence was never lost and healed
along with you.

<sup>18</sup> Thus does the miracle undo all things the world attests can never
*be* undone. And hopelessness and death must disappear before the
ancient clarion call of life. This call has power far beyond the weak
and miserable cry of death and guilt. The ancient calling of the Father
to His Son, and of the Son unto his own, will yet be the last trumpet
that the world will ever hear. Brother, there *is* no death. And this
you learn when you but wish to show your brother that you had no hurt of
him. He thinks your blood is on his hands, and so he stands condemned.
Yet it is given you to show him by your healing that his guilt is but
the fabric of a senseless dream.

<sup>19</sup> How just are miracles! For they bestow an equal gift of full
deliverance from guilt upon your brother and yourself. Your healing
saves him pain as well as you, and you are healed because you wished him
well. This is the law the miracle obeys; that healing sees no
specialness at all. It does not come from pity but from love. And love
would prove all suffering is but a vain imagining, a foolish wish with
no effects. Your health is a result of your desire to see your brother
with no blood upon his hands nor guilt upon his heart made heavy with
the proof of sin. And what you wish *is* given you to see.

<sup>20</sup> The “cost” of your serenity is his. This is the “price” the Holy
Spirit and the world interpret differently. The world perceives it as a
statement of the “fact” that your salvation *sacrifices* his. The Holy
Spirit *knows* your healing is the witness unto his and cannot be apart
from his at all. As long as he consents to suffer, you will be unhealed.
Yet you can show him that his suffering is purposeless and wholly
without cause. Show him your healing, and he will consent no more to
suffer. For his innocence has been established in your sight and his.
And laughter will replace your sighs because God's Son remembered that
he *is* God's Son.

<sup>21</sup> Who then fears healing? Only those to whom their brother's sacrifice
and pain are seen to represent their own serenity. Their helplessness
and weakness represent the grounds on which they *justify* his pain. The
constant sting of guilt he suffers serves to prove that he is slave but
they are free. The constant pain they suffer demonstrates that they are
free *because* they hold him bound. And sickness is desired to prevent a
shift of balance in the sacrifice. How could the Holy Spirit be deterred
an instant, even less, to reason with an argument for sickness such as
this? And need your healing be delayed because you pause to listen to
insanity?

<sup>22</sup> \[Correction is *not* your function. It belongs to One Who knows of
fairness, *not* of guilt. If you assume correction's role, you *lose*
the function of forgiveness. No one can forgive until he learns
correction is *but* to forgive and *never* to accuse. Alone, you
*cannot* see they are the same, and therefore is correction *not* of
you. Identity and function are the same, and *by* your function do you
know yourself. And thus, if you confuse your function with the function
of Another, you *must* be confused about yourself and who you are. What
is the separation but a wish to take God's function from Him and *deny*
that it is His? Yet if it is *not* His, it is not *yours*, for *you*
must lose what you would take away.[^5]

<sup>23</sup> \[In a split mind, identity *must* seem to be divided. Nor can anyone
perceive a function unified which has conflicting purposes and different
ends. Correction, to a mind so split, *must* be a way to punish sins you
think are *yours* in someone else. And thus does he become your victim,
*not* your brother, *different* from you in that he is *more guilty*,
thus in need of your correction as the one *more innocent* than he. This
splits *his* function off from yours and gives you both a *different*
role. And so you *cannot* be perceived as one and, with a single
function, that would *mean* a shared identity with but *one* end.

<sup>24</sup> \[Correction *you* would do *must* separate, because that is the
function given it *by* you. When you perceive correction is the *same*
as pardon, then you also know the Holy Spirit's mind and yours are one.
And so your *own* Identity is found. Yet must He work with what is
*given* Him, and you allow Him only *half* your mind. And thus He
represents the *other* half and seems to have a *different* purpose from
the one you cherish and you *think* is yours. Thus does your function
seem *divided*, with a half *in opposition* to a half. And these two
halves appear to represent a split within a self perceived as two.\]

<sup>25</sup> Consider how this self perception must extend, and do not overlook
the fact that every thought extends because that is its purpose, being
what it really *is*. From an idea of self as two, there comes a
necessary view of function split between the two. And what you would
correct is only half the error, which you think is all of it. Your
brother's sins become the central target for correction, lest your
errors and his own be seen as one. Yours are mistakes, but his are sins
and not the same as yours. His merit punishment, while yours in fairness
should be overlooked.

<sup>26</sup> In this interpretation of correction, your own mistakes you will not
even see. The focus of correction has been placed outside yourself on
one who cannot be a part of you while this perception lasts. What is
condemned can never be returned to its accuser, who hated it and hates
it still. This is your brother, focus of your hate, unworthy to be part
of you and thus outside yourself—the other half which is denied. And
only what is left without his presence is perceived as all of you. To
this remaining half the Holy Spirit must represent the other half until
you recognize it *is* the other half. And this He does by giving both of
you a function that is one, not different.

<sup>27</sup> Correction is the function given *both*, but neither one alone. And
when it is fulfilled as *shared*, it *must* correct mistakes in both of
you. It cannot leave mistakes in one unhealed and set the other free.
That is divided purpose which cannot be shared, and so it cannot be the
function which the Holy Spirit sees as His. And you can rest assured
that He will not fulfill a function He cannot understand and recognize
as His. For only thus can He keep yours preserved intact, despite your
separate views of what your function is. If He upheld divided function,
you were lost indeed. His inability to see His goal divided and distinct
for each of you preserves your Self from being made aware of any
function other than Its own. And thus is healing given both of you.

<sup>28</sup> Correction must be left to One Who knows correction and forgiveness
are the same. With half a mind, this is not understood. Leave then
correction to the mind that *is* united, functioning as one because It
is not split in purpose and conceives a single function as Its *only*
one. Here is the function given It conceived to be Its own and not apart
from that Its Giver keeps *because* it has been shared. In His
acceptance of this function lies the means whereby your mind is unified.
His single purpose unifies the halves of you which you perceive as
separate. And each forgives the other, that he may accept his other half
as part of him.

[^5]: Paragraphs 27.22–24 do not appear in the *Original Edition* manuscript. Previously numbered as paragraphs 21a–c, the content was restored in the 2009 Printing from an earlier manuscript from which an entire page had been lost. Starting with the 2012 Printing, paragraphs 22 through the end of Chapter 27 have been renumbered. –*Ed*.

