---
chapter: Twenty Seven
ctitle: The Body and the Dream
title: The Illusion of Suffering
ref: Tx.27.VIII
---

<sup>62</sup> Suffering is an emphasis upon all that the world has done to injure
you. Here is the world's demented version of salvation clearly shown.
Like to a dream of punishment in which the dreamer is unconscious of
what brought on the attack against himself, he sees himself attacked
unjustly and by something not himself. He is the victim of this
“something else,” a thing outside himself for which he has no reason to
be held responsible. He must be innocent because he knows not what he
does, but what is done to him. Yet is his own attack upon himself
apparent still, for it is he who bears the suffering. And he cannot
escape because its source is seen outside himself.

<sup>63</sup> Now you are being shown you *can* escape. All that is needed is you
look upon the problem as it *is*, and not the way that you have set it
up. How could there be another way to solve a problem which is very
simple but has been obscured by heavy clouds of complication which were
made to *keep* the problem unresolved? Without the clouds, the problem
will emerge in all its primitive simplicity. The choice will not be
difficult, because the problem is absurd when clearly seen. No one has
difficulty making up his mind to let a simple problem be resolved if it
is *seen* as hurting him and also very easily removed.

<sup>64</sup> The “reasoning” by which the world is made, on which it rests, by
which it is maintained, is simply this: “*You* are the cause of what I
do. Your presence *justifies* my wrath, and you exist and think *apart*
from me. While you attack, I must be innocent. And what I suffer from
*is* your attack.” No one who looks upon this “reasoning” exactly as it
is could fail to see it does not follow, and it makes no sense. Yet it
seems sensible because it *looks* as if the world were hurting you. And
so it seems as if there is no need to go beyond the obvious in terms of
cause.

<sup>65</sup> There is *indeed* a need. The world's escape from condemnation is a
need which those within the world are joined in sharing. Yet they do not
recognize their common need. For each one thinks that if he does his
part, the condemnation of the world will rest on him. And it is this
that he perceives to *be* his part in its deliverance. Vengeance must
have a focus. Otherwise is the avenger's knife in his own hand and
pointed to himself. And he must see it in another's hand if he would be
a victim of attack he did not choose. And thus he suffers from the
wounds a knife he does not hold has made upon himself. This is the
*purpose* of the world he sees. And looked at thus, the world provides
the means by which this purpose seems to be fulfilled.

<sup>66</sup> The means *attest* the purpose but are not themselves a cause. Nor
will the cause be changed by seeing it apart from its effects. The cause
*produces* the effects which then bear witness to the cause and not
themselves. Look, then, beyond effects. It is not here the cause of
suffering and sin must lie. And dwell not on the suffering and sin, for
they are but reflections of their cause.

<sup>67</sup> The part you play in salvaging the world from condemnation is your
*own* escape. Forget not that the witness to the world of evil cannot
speak except for what has seen a need for evil in the world. And this is
where your guilt was first beheld. In separation from your brother was
the first attack upon yourself begun. And it is this the world bears
witness to. Seek not another cause nor look among the mighty legions of
its witnesses for its undoing. They *support* its claim on your
allegiance. What conceals the truth is not where you should look to
*find* the truth. The witnesses to sin all stand within one little
space. And it is *here* you find the cause of your perspective on the
world.

<sup>68</sup> Once you were unaware of what the cause of everything the world
appeared to thrust upon you, uninvited and unasked, must really be. Of
one thing you were sure—of all the many causes you perceived as bringing
pain and suffering to you, your guilt was not among them. Nor did you in
any way request them for yourself. This is how *all* illusions come
about. The one who makes them does not see himself as making them, and
their reality does not depend on him. Whatever cause they have is
something quite apart from him, and what he sees is *separate* from his
mind. He cannot doubt his dreams' reality because he does not see the
part he plays in making them and making them seem real.

<sup>69</sup> No one can waken from a dream the world is dreaming *for* him. He
becomes a part of someone else's dream. He cannot choose to waken from a
dream he did not make. Helpless he stands, a victim to a dream conceived
and cherished by a separate mind. Careless indeed of him this mind must
be, as thoughtless of his peace and happiness as is the weather or the
time of day. It loves him not but casts him as it will in any role that
satisfies its dream. So little is his worth that he is but a dancing
shadow, leaping up and down according to a senseless plot conceived
within the idle dreaming of the world.

<sup>70</sup> This is the only picture you can see, the one alternative that you
can choose, the other possibility of cause if you be *not* the dreamer
of your dreams. And this is what you choose if you deny the cause of
suffering is in *your* mind. Be glad indeed it is, for thus are you the
*one* decider of your destiny in time. The choice is yours to make
between a sleeping death and dreams of evil or a happy wakening and joy
of life. What could you choose between *but* life or death, waking or
sleeping, peace or war, your dreams or your reality? Yet if the choice
is really given you, then you must see the causes of the things you
choose between exactly *as* they are and *where* they are. What choices
can be made between two states, but one of which is clearly recognized?
Who could be free to choose between effects when only one is seen as up
to him?

<sup>71</sup> An honest choice could never be perceived as one in which the choice
is split between a tiny you and an enormous world, with different dreams
about the truth in you. The gap between reality and dreams lies not
between the dreaming of the world and what you dream in secret. *They*
are one. The dreaming of the world is but a part of your own dream you
gave away and saw as if it were its start and ending both. Yet was it
started by *your* secret dream, which you do not perceive, although it
caused the part you see and do not doubt is real. How could you doubt it
while you lie asleep and dream in secret that its cause is real?

<sup>72</sup> A brother separated from yourself, an ancient enemy, a murderer who
stalks you in the night and plots your death, yet plans that it be
lingering and slow—of this you dream. Yet underneath this dream is yet
another in which you become the murderer, the secret enemy, the
scavenger and the destroyer of \[the\] brother and the world alike. Here
is the *cause* of suffering, the space between your dreams and your
reality. The little gap you do not even see, the birthplace of illusions
and of fear, the time of terror and of ancient hate, the instant of
disaster, all are here. Here is the *cause* of unreality. And it is here
that it will be undone.

<sup>73</sup> *You* are the dreamer of the world of dreams. No other cause it has,
nor ever will. Nothing more fearful than an idle dream has terrified
God's Son and made him think that he has lost his innocence, denied his
Father, and made war upon himself. So fearful is the dream, so seeming
real, he could not waken to reality without the sweat of terror and a
scream of mortal fear unless a gentler dream preceded his awaking and
allowed his calmer mind to welcome, not to fear, the Voice that calls
with love to waken him. \[A gentler dream, in which his suffering was
healed and where his brother was his friend.\] God willed he waken
gently and with joy. And gave him means to waken without fear. Accept
the dream He gave instead of yours. It is not difficult to \[shift\] a
dream when once the dreamer has been recognized.

<sup>74</sup> Rest in the Holy Spirit and allow His gentle dreams to take the place
of those you dreamed in terror and in fear of death. He brings forgiving
dreams in which the choice is not who is the murderer and who shall be
the victim. In the dreams He brings, there *is* no murder and there *is*
no death. The dream of guilt is fading from your sight, although your
eyes are closed. A smile has come to lighten up your sleeping face. The
sleep is peaceful now, for these are happy dreams.

<sup>75</sup> Dream softly of your sinless brother, who unites with you in holy
innocence. And from this dream, the Lord of Heaven will Himself awaken
His beloved Son. Dream of your brother's kindnesses instead of dwelling
in your dreams on his mistakes. Select his thoughtfulness to dream about
instead of counting up the hurts he gave. Forgive him his illusions and
give thanks to him for all the helpfulness he gave. And do not brush
aside his many gifts because he is not perfect in your dreams.

<sup>76</sup> He represents his Father, Whom you see as offering both life and
death to you. Brother, He gives but life. Yet what you see as gifts your
brother offers represent the gifts you dream your Father gives to you.
Let all your brother's gifts be seen in light of charity and kindness
offered you. And let no pain disturb your dream of deep appreciation for
his gifts to you.

