---
chapter: Twenty Three
ctitle: The War Against Yourself
title: The Laws of Chaos
ref: Tx.23.III
---

<sup>19</sup> The “laws” of chaos can be brought to light, though never understood.
Chaotic laws are hardly meaningful and therefore out of reason's sphere.
Yet they appear to constitute an obstacle to reason and to truth. Let
us, then, look upon them calmly, that we may look beyond them,
understanding what they are, not what they would maintain. It is
essential it be understood what they are for, because it is their
purpose to make meaningless and to attack the truth. Here are the laws
that rule the world you made. And yet they govern nothing and need not
be broken; merely looked upon and gone beyond.

<sup>20</sup> The first chaotic law is that the truth is different for everyone.
Like all these principles, this one maintains that each is separate and
has a different set of thoughts which sets him off from others. This
principle evolves from the belief there is a hierarchy of illusions;
some are more valuable and therefore true. Each one establishes this for
himself and *makes* it true by his attack on what another values. And
this is justified because the values differ and those who hold them seem
to be unlike and therefore enemies.

<sup>21</sup> Think how this seems to interfere with the first principle of
miracles. For this establishes degrees of truth among illusions, making
it appear that some of them are harder to overcome than others. If it
were realized that they are all the same and equally untrue, it would be
easy, then, to understand that miracles apply to *all* of them. Errors
of any kind can be corrected *because* they are untrue. When brought to
truth instead of to *each other*, they merely disappear. No part of
nothing can be more resistant to the truth than can another.

<sup>22</sup> The second law of chaos, dear indeed to every worshiper of sin, is
that each one must sin and therefore deserves attack and death. This
principle, closely related to the first, is the demand that errors call
for punishment and not correction. For the destruction of the one who
makes the error places him beyond correction and beyond forgiveness.
What he has done is thus interpreted as an irrevocable sentence upon
himself, which God Himself is powerless to overcome. Sin cannot be
remitted, being the belief the Son of God can make mistakes for which
his own destruction becomes inevitable.

<sup>23</sup> Think what this seems to do to the relationship between the Father
and the Son. Now it appears that they can never be one again. For *one*
must always be condemned and by the *other.* Now are they different and
*enemies.* And their relationship is one of opposition, just as the
separate aspects of the Son meet only to conflict but not to join. One
becomes weak, the other strong by his defeat. And fear of God and of
each other now appears as sensible, made real by what the Son of God has
done both to himself and his Creator. The arrogance on which the laws of
chaos stand could not be more apparent than emerges here.

<sup>24</sup> Here is a principle which would define what the Creator of reality
must be; what He must think and what He must believe; and how He must
respond, believing it. It is not seen as even necessary that He be asked
about the truth of what has been established for His belief. His Son can
tell Him this, and He has but the choice whether to take his word for it
or be mistaken. This leads directly to the third preposterous belief
that seems to make chaos eternal. For if God cannot *be* mistaken, then
He *must* accept his Son's belief in what he is and hate him for it.

<sup>25</sup> See how the fear of God is reinforced by this third principle. Now it
becomes impossible to turn to Him for help in misery. For now He has
become the “enemy” Who *caused* it and to Whom appeal is useless. Nor
can salvation lie within the Son, whose every aspect seems to be at war
with Him and justified in its attack. And now is conflict made
inevitable and beyond the help of God. And now salvation must remain
impossible because the savior has become the enemy.

<sup>26</sup> There can be no release and no escape. Atonement thus becomes a myth,
and vengeance, not forgiveness, is the Will of God. From where all this
begins, there is no sight of help that can succeed. Only destruction can
*be* the outcome. And God Himself seems to be siding with it to overcome
His Son. Think not the ego will enable you to find escape from what it
*wants.* That is the function of this course, which does not value what
the ego cherishes.

<sup>27</sup> The ego values only what it *takes*. This leads to the fourth law of
chaos, which, if the others are accepted, must be true. This seeming law
is the belief you *have* what you have taken. By this, another's loss
becomes your gain, and thus it fails to recognize that you can never
take away save from *yourself*. Yet all the other laws must lead to
this. For enemies do not give willingly to one another, nor would they
seek to share the things they value. And what your enemies would keep
from you must be worth having, just because they keep it hidden from
your sight.

<sup>28</sup> All of the mechanisms of madness are seen emerging here: the “enemy,”
made strong by keeping hidden the valuable inheritance which should be
yours; your justified position and attack for what has been withheld;
and the inevitable loss the enemy must suffer to save yourself. Thus do
the guilty ones protest their “innocence.” Were they not forced into
this foul attack by the unscrupulous behavior of the enemy, they would
respond with only kindness. But in a savage world, the kind cannot
survive, so they must take or else be taken from.

<sup>29</sup> And now there is a vague unanswered question, not yet “explained.”
What is this precious thing, this priceless pearl, this hidden secret
treasure, to be wrested in righteous wrath from this most treacherous
and cunning enemy? It must be what you want but never found. And now you
“understand” the reason why you found it not. For it was taken from you
by this enemy and hidden where you would not think to look. He hid it in
his body, making it the cover for his guilt, the hiding place for what
belongs to you. Now must his body be destroyed and sacrificed that you
may *have* that which belongs to you. His treachery demands his death
that *you* may live. And you attack only in self defense.

<sup>30</sup> But what is it you want that *needs* his death? Can you be sure your
murderous attack is justified unless you know what it is *for*? And here
a final principle of chaos comes to the rescue. It holds there is a
*substitute* for love. This is the “magic” that will cure all of your
pain; the missing factor in your madness that makes it “sane.” This is
the reason why you must attack. Here is what makes your vengeance
justified. Behold, unveiled, the ego's secret gift, torn from your
brother's body, hidden there in malice and in hatred for the one to whom
the gift belongs. He would deprive you of the secret ingredient which
would give meaning to your life. The substitute for love, born of your
enmity to one another, must be salvation. It has no substitute, and
there is only one. And all your relationships have but the purpose of
seizing it and making it your own.

<sup>31</sup> Never is your possession made complete. And never will your brother
cease his attack on you for what you stole. Nor will God end His
vengeance upon both, for in His madness He must have this substitute for
love and kill you both. You who believe you walk in sanity, with feet on
solid ground and through a world where meaning can be found, consider
this: \[These *are* the laws on which your “sanity” appears to rest.\]
These *are* the principles which make the ground beneath your feet seem
solid. And it *is* here you look for meaning. These are the laws you
made for your salvation. They hold in place the substitute for Heaven
which you prefer. This is their purpose; they were made for this. There
is no point in asking what they mean. That is apparent. The means of
madness must be insane. Are you as certain that you realize the *goal*
is madness?

<sup>32</sup> No one *wants* madness, nor does anyone cling to his madness if he
sees that this is what it *is*. What protects madness is the belief that
it is *true*. It is the function of insanity to take the *place* of
truth. It must be seen as truth to be believed. And if it is the truth,
then must its opposite, which was the truth before, be madness now. Such
a reversal, completely turned around, with madness sanity, illusions
true, attack a kindness, hatred love and murder benediction, is the goal
the laws of chaos serve. These are the means by which the laws of God
appear to be reversed. Here do the laws of sin appear to hold love
captive and let sin go free.

<sup>33</sup> These do not *seem* to be the goals of chaos, for by the great
reversal, they appear to be the laws of *order*. How could it not be so?
Chaos is lawlessness and *has* no laws. To be believed, its seeming laws
must be perceived as real. Their goal of madness must be seen as sanity.
And fear, with ashen lips and sightless eyes, blinded and terrible to
look upon, is lifted to the throne of love, its dying conqueror, its
substitute, the savior from salvation. How lovely do the laws of fear
make death appear! Give thanks unto the hero on love's throne, who saved
the Son of God for fear and death!

<sup>34</sup> And yet, how can it be that laws like these can be believed? There is
a strange device that makes it possible. Nor is it unfamiliar; we have
seen how it appears to function many times before. In truth it does
*not* function, yet in dreams, where only shadows play the major roles,
it seems most powerful. No law of chaos could compel belief but for the
emphasis on *form* and disregard of *content*. No one who thinks that
one of them is true *sees* what it says. Some forms it takes seem to
have meaning, and that is all.

<sup>35</sup> How can some forms of murder *not* mean death? Can an attack in *any*
form be love? What *form* of condemnation is a blessing? Who makes his
savior powerless and *finds* salvation? Let not the form of the attack
on him deceive you. You *cannot* seek to harm him and be saved. Who can
find safety from attack by turning on himself? How can it matter *what*
the form this madness takes? It is a judgment that defeats itself,
condemning what it says it wants to save. Be not deceived when madness
takes a form you think is lovely. What is intent on your destruction is
*not* your friend.

<sup>36</sup> You would maintain and think it true that you do not believe these
senseless laws nor act upon them. And when you look at what they *say*,
they cannot *be* believed. Brothers, you *do* believe them. For how else
could you perceive the form they take with content such as this? Can
*any* form of this be tenable? Yet you believe them *for* the form they
take and do not *recognize* the content. It never changes. Can you paint
rosy lips upon a skeleton, dress it in loveliness, pet it and pamper it,
and make it *live*? And can you be content with an *illusion* that you
are living?

<sup>37</sup> There *is* no life outside of Heaven. Where God created life, there
life must be. In any state apart from Heaven, life is illusion. At best,
it seems like life; at worst, like death. Yet both are judgments on what
is not life, equal in their inaccuracy and lack of meaning. Life not in
Heaven is impossible, and what is not in Heaven is not anywhere. Outside
of Heaven, only the conflict of illusions stands; senseless, impossible,
and beyond all reason, and yet perceived as an eternal barrier to
Heaven. Illusions *are* but forms. Their content is *never* true.

<sup>38</sup> The laws of chaos govern all illusions. Their forms conflict, making
it seem quite possible to value some above the others. Yet each one
rests as surely on the belief the laws of chaos are the laws of order as
do the others. Each one upholds these laws completely, offering a
certain witness that these laws are true. The seeming gentler forms of
the attack are no less certain in their witnessing or their results.
Certain it is illusions will bring fear because of the beliefs that they
imply, not for their form. And lack of faith in love in *any* form
attests to chaos as reality.

<sup>39</sup> From the belief in sin, the faith in chaos *must* follow. It is
because it follows that it seems to be a logical conclusion—a valid step
in ordered thought. The steps to chaos *do* follow neatly from their
starting point. Each is a different form in the progression of truth's
reversal, leading still deeper into terror and away from truth. Think
not one step is smaller than another nor that return from one is easier.
The whole descent from Heaven lies in each one. And where your thinking
starts, there must it end.

<sup>40</sup> Brothers, take not one step in the descent to hell. For having taken
one, you will not recognize the rest for what they are. And they *will*
follow. Attack in any form has placed your foot upon the twisted
stairway that leads from Heaven. Yet any instant it is possible to have
all this undone. How can you know whether you chose the stairs to Heaven
or the way to hell? Quite easily. How do you feel? Is peace in your
awareness? Are you certain which way you go? And are you sure the goal
of Heaven *can* be reached? If not, you walk alone. Ask, then, your
Friend to join with you and *give* you certainty of where you go.

