---
chapter: Twenty Three
ctitle: The War Against Yourself
title: The Irreconcilable Beliefs
ref: Tx.23.II
---

<sup>7</sup> The memory of God comes to the quiet mind. It cannot come where there
is conflict, for a mind at war against itself remembers not eternal
gentleness. The means of war are not the means of peace, and what the
warlike would remember is not love. War is impossible unless belief in
victory is cherished. Conflict within you must imply that you believe
the ego has the power to *be* victorious. Why else would you identify
with it? Surely you realize the ego is at war with God. Certain it is it
has no enemy. Yet just as certain is its fixed belief it *has* an enemy
that it must overcome and *will* succeed.

<sup>8</sup> Do you not realize a war against yourself would *be* a war on God? Is
victory conceivable? And if it were, is this a victory that you would
*want*? The death of God, if it were possible, would be *your* death. Is
this a *victory*? The ego *always* marches to defeat because it thinks
that triumph over you is possible. And God thinks otherwise. This is no
war—only the mad belief the Will of God can be attacked and overthrown.
You may *identify* with this belief, but never will it be more than
madness. And fear will reign in madness and will seem to have replaced
love there. This is the conflict's *purpose.* And to those who think
that it is possible, the means seem real.

<sup>9</sup> Be certain that it is impossible God and the ego, or yourself and it,
will *ever* meet. You *seem* to meet and make your strange alliances on
grounds that have no meaning. For your beliefs converge upon the body,
the ego's chosen home, which you believe is *yours*. You meet at a
mistake—an error in your self-appraisal. The ego joins with an illusion
of yourself you *share* with it. And yet illusions cannot join. They are
the same, and they are nothing. Their joining lies in nothingness; two
are as meaningless as one or as a thousand. The ego joins with nothing,
*being* nothing. The victory it seeks is meaningless as is itself.

<sup>10</sup> Brothers, the war against yourself is almost over. The journey's end
is at the place of peace. Would you not now accept the peace offered you
here? This “enemy” you fought as an intruder on your peace is here
transformed before your sight into the giver of your peace. Your “enemy”
was God Himself, to Whom all conflict, triumph, and attack of any kind
are all unknown. He loves you perfectly, completely, and eternally. The
Son of God at war with his Creator is a condition as ridiculous as
nature roaring at the wind in anger and proclaiming that it is part of
itself no more.

<sup>11</sup> Could nature possibly establish this and make it true? Nor *is* it up
to you to say what shall be part of you and what is kept apart. The war
against yourself was undertaken to teach the Son of God that he is not
himself and not his Father's Son. For this, the memory of his Father
*must* be forgotten. It *is* forgotten in the body's life, and if you
think you are a body, you will believe you *have* forgotten it. Yet
truth can never be forgotten by *itself*, and you have *not* forgotten
what you are. Only a strange illusion of yourself, a wish to triumph
over what you are, remembers not.

<sup>12</sup> The war against yourself is but the battle of two illusions,
struggling to make them different from each other in the belief the one
which conquers will be true. There *is* no conflict between them and the
*truth.* Nor *are* they different from each other. Both are not true.
And so it matters not what form they take. What made them is insane, and
they remain part of what made them. Madness holds out no menace to
reality and has no influence upon it. Illusions *cannot* triumph over
truth, nor can they threaten it in any way. And the reality which they
deny is not a part of them.

<sup>13</sup> What *you* remember *is* a part of you. For you *must* be as God
created you. Truth does not fight against illusions, nor do illusions
fight against the truth. Illusions battle only with themselves. Being
fragmented, they fragment. But truth is indivisible and far beyond their
little reach. You will remember what you know when you have learned you
cannot *be* in conflict. One illusion about yourself can battle with
another, yet the war of two illusions is a state where *nothing*
happens. There is no victor, and there is no victory. And truth stands
radiant, apart from conflict, untouched and quiet in the peace of God.

<sup>14</sup> Conflict must be between *two* forces. It cannot exist between one
power and nothingness. There is nothing you could attack that is not
part of you. And *by* attacking it, you make two illusions of yourself
in conflict with each other. And this occurs whenever you look on
anything that God created with anything but love. Conflict is fearful,
for it is the *birth* of fear. Yet what is born of nothing cannot win
reality through battle. Why would you fill your world with conflicts
with yourself? Let all this madness be undone for you and turn in peace
to the remembrance of God, still shining in your quiet mind.

<sup>15</sup> See how the conflict of illusions disappears when it is brought to
truth! For it seems real only as long as it is seen as war between
conflicting *truths*, the conqueror to be the truer, the more real, and
vanquisher of the illusion that was less real, made an illusion by
defeat. Thus, conflict is the choice *between* illusions, one to be
crowned as real, the other vanquished and despised. Here will the Father
*never* be remembered. Yet no illusion can invade His home and drive Him
out of what He loves forever. And what He loves must be forever quiet
and at peace *because* it is His home. And you who are beloved of Him
are no illusions, being as true and holy as Himself.

<sup>16</sup> The stillness of your certainty of Him and of yourself is home to
both of you, who dwell as one and not apart. Open the door of His most
holy home and let forgiveness sweep away all trace of the belief in sin
that keeps God homeless and His Son with Him. You are not strangers in
the house of God. Welcome your brother to the home where God has set him
in serenity and peace and dwells with him. Illusions have no place where
love abides, protecting you from everything that is not true. You dwell
in peace as limitless as its Creator, and everything is given those who
would remember Him. Over His home the Holy Spirit watches, sure that its
peace can never be disturbed.

<sup>17</sup> How can the resting-place of God turn on itself and seek to overcome
the One Who dwells there? And think what happens when the house of God
perceives itself divided. The altar disappears, the light grows dim, the
temple of the Holy One becomes a house of sin. And nothing is remembered
except illusions. Illusions can conflict because their forms are
different. And they do battle only to establish which form is true.

<sup>18</sup> Illusion meets illusion; truth, itself. The meeting of illusions
leads to war. Peace, looking on itself, extends itself. War is the
condition in which fear is born and grows and seeks to dominate. Peace
is the state where love abides and seeks to share itself. Conflict and
peace are opposites. Where one abides the other cannot be; where either
goes the other disappears. So is the memory of God obscured in minds
that have become illusion's battleground. Yet far beyond this senseless
war it shines, ready to be remembered when you side with peace.

