---
chapter: Twenty Three
ctitle: The War Against Yourself
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.23.I
---

Do you not see the opposite of frailty and weakness is sinlessness?
Innocence is strength, and nothing else is strong. The sinless cannot
fear, for sin of any kind is weakness. The show of strength attack would
use to cover frailty conceals it not, for how can the unreal be hidden?
No one is strong who has an enemy, and no one can attack unless he
thinks he has. Belief in enemies is therefore the belief in weakness,
and what is weak is *not* the Will of God. Being opposed to it, it is
its “enemy.” And God is feared as an *opposing* will.

<sup>2</sup> How strange indeed becomes this war against yourself! You will believe
that everything you use for sin can hurt you and become your enemy. And
you will fight against it and try to weaken it because of this; and you
will think that you succeeded and attack again. It is as certain you
will fear what you attack as it is sure that you will love what you
perceive as sinless. He walks in peace who travels sinlessly along the
way love shows him. For love walks with him there, protecting him from
fear. And he will see only the sinless, who can *not* attack.

<sup>3</sup> Walk you in glory with your head held high, and fear no evil. The
innocent are safe because they share their innocence. Nothing they see
is harmful, for their awareness of the truth releases everything from
the illusion of harmfulness. And what seemed harmful now stands shining
in their innocence, released from sin and fear, and happily returned to
love. They share the strength of love *because* they looked on
innocence. And every error disappeared because they saw it not. Who
looks for glory finds it where it *is*. Where could it be but in the
innocent?

<sup>4</sup> Let not the little interferers pull you to littleness. There *can* be
no attraction of guilt in innocence. Think what a happy world you walk
with truth beside you! Do not give up this world of freedom for a little
sigh of seeming sin nor for a tiny stirring of guilt's attraction. Would
you, for all these meaningless distractions, lay Heaven aside? Your
destiny and purpose are far beyond them in the clean place where
littleness does not exist. Your purpose is at variance with littleness
of any kind. And so it is at variance with sin.

<sup>5</sup> Let us not let littleness lead God's Son into temptation. His glory is
*beyond* it, measureless and timeless as eternity. Do not let time
intrude upon your sight of him. Leave him not frightened and alone in
his temptation but help him rise above it and perceive the light of
which he is a part. Your innocence will light the way to his, and so is
yours protected and *kept* in your awareness. For who can know his glory
and perceive the little and the weak about him? Who can walk trembling
in a fearful world and realize that Heaven's glory shines on him?

<sup>6</sup> Nothing around you but is part of you. Look on it lovingly, and see
the light of Heaven in it. So will you come to understand all that is
given you. In kind forgiveness will the world sparkle and shine and
everything you once thought sinful now will be reinterpreted as part of
Heaven. How beautiful it is to walk clean and redeemed and happy through
a world in bitter need of the redemption that your innocence bestows
upon it! What can you value more than this? For here is your salvation
and your freedom. And it must be complete if *you* would recognize it.

