---
chapter: Two
ctitle: The Illusion of Separation
title: The Correction for Lack of Love
ref: Tx.2.V
---

<sup>82</sup> The first corrective step is *know first* that this is an expression of
fear. Then say to yourself that you must somehow have willed not to
love, or the fear which arises from behavior-will conflict could not
have arisen. Then the whole process is nothing more than a series of
pragmatic steps in the larger process of accepting the Atonement as *the*
remedy. These steps can be summarized as follows:

1. <sup>83</sup> Know first that this is fear.

2. <sup>84</sup> Fear arises from lack of love.

3. <sup>85</sup> The *only* remedy for lack of love is perfect love.

4. <sup>86</sup> Perfect love is the Atonement.

<sup>87</sup> We have emphasized that the miracle, or the *expression* of Atonement,
is always a sign of real respect *from* the worthy *to* the worthy. This
worth is re-established by the Atonement. It is obvious, then, that when
you are afraid you have placed yourself in a position where you *need*
Atonement, because you have done something loveless, having willed
without love. This is precisely the situation for which the Atonement
was offered. The need for the remedy inspired its creation. As long as
you recognize only the need for the remedy, you will remain fearful.
However, as soon as you remedy it, you have also abolished the fear.
This is how true healing occurs.

<sup>88</sup> Everyone experiences fear, and no one enjoys it. Yet it would take
very little right-thinking to realize why fear occurs. Very few people
appreciate the real power of the mind, and no one remains fully aware of
it all the time. However, if anyone hopes to spare himself from fear,
there are some things he must realize and realize fully. The mind is a
very powerful creator, and it never loses its creative force. It never
sleeps. Every instant it is creating and *always* as you will. Many of
your ordinary expressions reflect this. For example, when you say,
“Don't give it a thought,” you imply that if you do not think about
something, it will have no effect on you. And this is true enough.

<sup>89</sup> On the other hand, many other expressions clearly illustrate the
prevailing *lack* of awareness of thought-power. For example, you say,
“Just an idle thought,” and mean that the thought has no effect. You
also speak of some actions as “thoughtless,” implying that if the person
had thought, he would not behave as he did. While expressions like
“think big” give some recognition to the power of thought, they still
come nowhere near the truth. You do not expect to grow when you say it,
because you do not really think that you will.

<sup>90</sup> It is hard to recognize that thought and belief combine into a power
surge that can literally move mountains. It appears at first glance that
to believe such power about yourself is merely arrogant, but that is not
the real reason why you do not believe it. People *prefer* to believe that
their thoughts cannot exert real control, because they are *literally*
afraid of them. Many psychotherapists attempt to help people who are
afraid, say, of their death wishes by depreciating the power of the
wish. They even try to “free” the patient by persuading him that he can
think whatever he wants without any *real* effect at all.

<sup>91</sup> There is a real dilemma here which only the truly right-minded can
escape. Death wishes do not kill in the physical sense, but they *do* kill
spiritual awareness. *All* destructive thinking is dangerous. Given a
death wish, a man has no choice except to *act* upon the thought or behave
*contrary* to it. He thus chooses *only* between homicide and fear. The
other possibility is that he depreciates the power of his thought. This
is the usual psychoanalytic approach. It *does* allay guilt but at the
cost of rendering thinking impotent. If you believe that what you think
is ineffectual you may cease to be overly afraid of it, but you are
hardly likely to respect it.

<sup>92</sup> The world is full of examples of how man has depreciated himself
because he is afraid of his own thoughts. In some forms of insanity,
thoughts are glorified, but this is only because the underlying
depreciation was too effective for tolerance. The truth is that there
*are* no “idle” thoughts. *All* thinking produces form at some level. The
reason people are afraid of ESP and so often react against it is because
they *know* that thoughts can hurt them. Their own thoughts have made them
vulnerable.

<sup>93</sup> You who constantly complain about fear still persist in creating it.
I told you before that you cannot ask *me* to release you from fear
because I *know* it does not exist, but *you* do not. If I merely intervened
between your thoughts and their results, I would be tampering with a
basic law of cause and effect, the most fundamental law there is in this
world. I would hardly help if I depreciated the power of your own
thinking. This would be in direct opposition to the purpose of this
course. It is much more helpful to remind you that you do not guard your
thoughts carefully except for a small part of the day and somewhat
inconsistently even then. You may feel at this point that it would take
a miracle to enable you to do this, which is perfectly true.

<sup>94</sup> Men are not used to miraculous thinking, but they can be *trained* to
think that way. All miracle workers need that kind of training. I cannot
let them leave their minds unguarded, or they will not be able to help
me. Miracle working entails a full realization of the power of thought
and real avoidance of miscreation. Otherwise, a miracle will be
necessary to set the mind *itself* straight, a circular process which
would hardly foster the time collapse for which the miracle was
intended. Nor would it induce the healthy respect for true cause and
effect which every miracle worker must have.

<sup>95</sup> [Miracles cannot free the miracle worker from fear.] Both miracles
*and* fear come from thoughts, and if you were not free to choose one, you
would also not be free to choose the other. By choosing the miracle, you
*have* rejected fear. You have been afraid of God, of me, of yourselves,
and of practically everyone you know at one time or another. This is
because you have misperceived or miscreated us and believe in what you
have made. You would never have done this if you were not afraid of your
own thoughts. The vulnerable are essentially miscreators because they
misperceive creation.

<sup>96</sup> You persist in believing that when you do not consciously watch your
mind, it is unmindful. It is time, however, to consider the whole world
of the unconscious or “unwatched” mind. This may well frighten you
because it is the *source* of fear. The unwatched mind is responsible for
the whole content of the unconscious which lies *above* the miracle level.
All psychoanalytic theorists have made some contribution in this
connection, but none of them has seen it in its true entirety. They have
all made one common error in that they attempted to uncover unconscious
*content*. You cannot understand unconscious activity in these terms
because “content” is applicable *only* to the more superficial unconscious
levels, to which the individual himself contributes. This is the level
at which he can readily introduce fear and usually does.

<sup>97</sup> When man miscreates he is in pain. The cause and effect principle
here is temporarily a real expediter. Actually, “Cause” is a term
properly belonging to God, and “Effect,” which should also be
capitalized, is His Son. This entails a set of Cause and Effect
relationships which are totally different from those which man
introduced into his own miscreations. The fundamental opponents in the
real basic conflict are creation and miscreation. All *fear* is implicit
in the second, just as all *love* is inherent in the first. Because of
this difference, the basic conflict *is* one between love and fear.

<sup>98</sup> It has already been said that man believes he *cannot* control fear
because he himself created it. His belief in it seems to render it out
of his control by definition. Yet any attempt to resolve the basic
conflict through the concept of *mastery* of fear is meaningless. In fact
it asserts the *power* of fear by the simple assumption that it *need* be
mastered. The essential resolution rests entirely on the mastery of
*love*. In the interim, the sense of conflict is inevitable since man has
placed himself in a strangely illogical position. He believes in the
power of what does not exist.

<sup>99</sup> Two concepts which *cannot* coexist are “nothing” and “everything.” To
whatever extent one is believed in, the other *has been* denied. In the
conflict fear is really nothing, and love is everything. This is because
whenever light enters darkness, the darkness *is* abolished. What man
believes *is* true for him. In this sense the separation *has* occurred, and
to deny this is merely to misuse denial. However, to concentrate on
error is merely a further misuse of defenses. The true corrective
procedure is to recognize error temporarily but *only* as an indication
that *immediate* correction is mandatory. This establishes a state of mind
in which the Atonement can be accepted *without* delay.

<sup>100</sup> It should be emphasized, however, that ultimately there is no
compromise possible between everything and nothing. Time is essentially
a device by which all compromise in this respect can be given up. It
seems to be abolished by degrees because time itself involves a concept
of intervals which do not really exist. The faulty use of creation made
this necessary as a corrective device. “And God so loved the world that
He gave His only begotten Son that whosoever believeth in Him shall not
perish, but have eternal life” needs only one slight correction to be
entirely meaningful in this context. It should read, “He gave it *to* His
only begotten Son.”

<sup>101</sup> It should especially be noted that God has only *one* Son. If all the
Souls God created *are* His Sons, then every Soul *must* be an integral part
of the whole Sonship. You do not find the concept that the whole is
greater than its parts difficult to understand. You should therefore not
have too much trouble in understanding this.

<sup>102</sup> The Sonship in its oneness does transcend the sum of its parts.
However, this is obscured as long as any of its parts are missing. That
is why the conflict cannot ultimately be resolved until *all* the parts of
the Sonship have returned. Only then can the meaning of wholeness, in
the true sense, be fully understood.

<sup>103</sup> Any part of the Sonship can believe in error or incompleteness if he
so elects. However, if he does so, he is believing in the existence of
nothingness. The correction of this error is the Atonement. We have
already briefly spoken about readiness, but there are some additional
points which might be helpful here. Readiness is nothing more than the
*prerequisite* for accomplishment. The two should not be confused. As soon
as a state of readiness occurs, there is usually some will to
accomplish, but this is by no means necessarily undivided. The state
does not imply more than a *potential* for a shift of will.

<sup>104</sup> Confidence cannot develop fully until mastery has been accomplished.
We have already attempted to correct the fundamental error that fear can
be mastered and have emphasized that only *love* can be mastered. You have
attested only to your readiness. Mastery of love involves a much more
complete confidence than either of you has attained. However, the
readiness at least is an indication that you believe this is possible.
That is only the beginning of confidence. In case this be misunderstood
to imply that an enormous amount of time will be necessary between
readiness and mastery, let me remind you that time and space are under
my control.

<sup>105</sup> One of the chief ways in which man can correct his magic-miracle
confusion is to remember that he did not create himself. He is apt to
forget this when he becomes egocentric, and this places him in a
position where the belief in magic in some form is virtually inevitable.
His will to create was given him by his own Creator, Who was expressing
the same will in His creation. Since creative ability rests in the mind,
everything that man creates is necessarily a matter of will. It also
follows that whatever he creates is real in his own sight but not
necessarily in the sight of God. This basic distinction leads us
directly into the real meaning of the Last Judgment.

