---
chapter: Two
ctitle: The Illusion of Separation
title: The Reinterpretation of Defenses
ref: Tx.2.II
---

<sup>18</sup> When you are afraid of *anything*, you are acknowledging its power to
hurt you. Remember that where your heart is, there is your treasure
also. This means that you believe in what you *value*. If you are afraid,
you are *valuing wrongly*. Human understanding will inevitably value
wrongly and, by endowing all human thoughts with equal power, will
inevitably *destroy* peace. That is why the Bible speaks of “the peace of
God which *passeth* (human) understanding.” *This* peace is totally
incapable of being shaken by human errors of *any* kind. It denies the
ability of *anything* which is not of God to affect you in *any* way.

<sup>19</sup> This is the *proper* use of denial. It is not used to *hide* anything but
to *correct* error. It brings *all* error into the light, and since error
and darkness are the same, it corrects error automatically. True denial
is a powerful protective device. You can and should deny any belief that
error can hurt you. This kind of denial is not a concealment device but
a correction device. The “right mind” of the mentally healthy *depends* on
it. You can do *anything* I ask. I have asked you to perform miracles and
have made it clear that miracles are *natural, corrective, healing, and
universal*. There is nothing good they cannot do, but they cannot be
performed in the spirit of doubt.

<sup>20</sup> God and the Souls He created are *completely* dependent on each other.
The creation of the Soul has already been perfectly accomplished, but
the creation *by* Souls has not. God created Souls so He could depend on
them *because* He created them perfectly. He gave them His peace so they
could not be shaken and would be unable to be deceived. Whenever you are
afraid, you are deceived. Your mind is *not* serving the Soul. This
literally starves the Soul by denying its daily bread. God offers *only*
mercy. *Your* words should reflect only mercy because that is what you
have received, and that is what you should *give*.

<sup>21</sup> Justice is a temporary expedient or an attempt to teach man the
meaning of mercy. Its judgmental side arises only because man is capable
of *in*justice if that is what his mind creates. You are afraid of God's
Will because you have used your own will, which He created in the
likeness of His own, to *miscreate*. What you do *not* realize is that the
mind can miscreate *only* when it is *not* free. An imprisoned mind is not
free by definition. It is possessed or held back by itself. Its will is
therefore limited and is not free to assert *itself*. The real meaning of
“are of one kind,” which was mentioned before, is “are of one mind or
will.” When the will of the Sonship and the Father are one, their
perfect accord *is* Heaven.

<sup>22</sup> Denial of error is a powerful defense of truth. You will note that we
have been shifting the emphasis from the negative to the positive use of
denial. As we have already stated, denial is not a purely negative
device; it results in positive miscreation. That is the way the mentally
ill *do* employ it. But remember a very early thought of your own—“Never
underestimate the power of denial.” In the service of the “right mind,”
the denial of *error* frees the mind and reestablishes the freedom of the
will. When the will is *really* free, it *cannot* miscreate because it
recognizes *only* truth.

<sup>23</sup> False projection arises out of false denial, *not* out of its proper
use. My own role in the Atonement is one of *true* projection; I can
project to *you* the affirmation of truth. If you project error to me or
to yourself, you are interfering with the process. *My* use of projection,
which can also be yours, is *not* based on faulty denial. It *does* involve,
however, the very powerful use of the denial of errors. The miracle
worker is one who accepts my kind of denial and projection, unites his
own inherent abilities to deny and project with mine, and imposes them
back on himself and others. This establishes the total *lack* of threat
anywhere. Together we can then work for the real time of peace, which is
eternal.

<sup>24</sup> The improper use of defenses is quite widely recognized, but their
proper use had not been sufficiently understood as yet. They can *indeed*
create man's perception both of himself and of the world. They can
distort or correct depending on what you use them *for*.

<sup>25</sup> Denial should be directed only to error, and projection should be
reserved only for truth. You should truly give as you have truly
received. The Golden Rule can work effectively only on this basis.

<sup>26</sup> Intellectualization is a term which stems from the mind-brain
confusion. “Right-mindedness” is the device which defends the *right* mind
and gives it control over the body. “Intellectualization” implies a
split, while “right-mindedness” involves healing.

<sup>27</sup> Withdrawal is properly employed in the service of withdrawing from
the meaningless. It is *not* a device for escape, but for consolidation.
There *is* only One Mind.

<sup>28</sup> Dissociation is quite similar. You *should* split off or dissociate
yourself from error but only in defense of integration.

<sup>29</sup> Detachment is essentially a weaker form of dissociation.

<sup>30</sup> Flight can be undertaken in whatever direction you choose, but note
that the concept itself implies flight *from* something. Flight from error
is perfectly appropriate.

<sup>31</sup> Distantiation can be properly used as a way of putting distance
between yourself and what you *should* fly from.

<sup>32</sup> Regression is an effort to return to your own original state. It can
thus be utilized to *restore*, rather than to go back to the *less* mature.

<sup>33</sup> Sublimation should be a redirection of effort to the sublime.

<sup>34</sup> There are many other so-called “dynamic” concepts which are profound
errors due essentially to the misuse of defenses. Among them is the
concept of different levels of aspiration, which actually result from
level confusion. However, the main point to be understood from this
section is that you can defend truth as well as error and, in fact, much
better.

<sup>35</sup> The means are easier to clarify after the value of the goal itself is
firmly established. Everyone defends his own treasure. You do not have
to tell him to do so because he will do it automatically. The real
questions still remain. *What* do you treasure, and *how much* do you
treasure it? Once you have learned to consider these two questions and
to bring them into *all* your actions as the true criteria for behavior, I
will have little difficulty in clarifying the means. You have not
learned to be consistent about this as yet. I have therefore
concentrated on showing you that the means *are* available whenever you
*ask*. You can, however, save a lot of time if you do not extend this step
unduly. The correct focus will shorten it immeasurably.

<sup>36</sup> The Atonement is the *only* defense which cannot be used destructively.
That is because, while everyone must eventually join it, it is *not* a
device which was generated by man. The Atonement *principle* was in effect
long before the Atonement itself began. The principle was love, and the
Atonement itself was an *act* of love. Acts were not necessary before the
separation because the time-space belief did not exist. It was only
after the separation that the defense of Atonement and the necessary
conditions for its fulfillment were planned.

<sup>37</sup> It became increasingly apparent that all of the defenses which man
can choose to use constructively *or* destructively were not enough to
save him. It was therefore decided that he needed a defense which was so
splendid that he could not misuse it, although he *could* refuse it. His
choice could not, however, turn it into a weapon of attack, which is the
inherent characteristic of all other defenses. The Atonement thus
becomes the *only* defense which is *not* a two-edged sword.

<sup>38</sup> The Atonement actually began long before the crucifixion. Many Souls
offered their efforts on behalf of the separated ones, but they could
not withstand the strength of the attack and had to be brought back.
Angels came, too, but their protection did not suffice because the
separated ones were not interested in peace. They had already split
their minds and were bent on further dividing rather than reintegrating.
The levels they introduced into their minds turned against each other,
and they established differences, divisions, cleavages, dispersions, and
all the other concepts related to the increasing splits which they
produced.

<sup>39</sup> Not being in their right minds, they turned their defenses from
protection to assault and acted literally insanely. It was essential to
introduce a split-proof device which could be used *only* to heal, if it
were used at all. The Atonement was built into the space-time belief in
order to set a limit on the need for the belief and ultimately to make
learning complete. The Atonement *is* the final lesson. Learning itself,
like the classrooms in which it occurs, is temporary. The ability to
learn has no value when change of understanding is no longer necessary.
The eternally creative have nothing to learn. Only after the separation
was it necessary to direct the creative forces to learning because
changed behavior had become mandatory.

<sup>40</sup> Men can learn to improve their behavior and can also learn to become
better and better learners. This serves to bring them into closer and
closer accord with the Sonship, but the Sonship itself is a perfect
creation, and perfection is *not* a matter of degree. Only while there are
different degrees is learning meaningful. The “evolution” of man is
merely a process by which he proceeds from one degree to the next. He
corrects his previous missteps by stepping forward. This represents a
process which is actually incomprehensible in temporal terms because he
*returns* as he goes forward.

<sup>41</sup> The Atonement is the device by which he can free himself from the
past as he goes ahead. It *undoes* his past errors, thus making it
unnecessary for him to keep retracing his steps without advancing to his
return. In this sense the Atonement saves time but, like the miracle
which serves it, does *not* abolish it. As long as there is need for
Atonement, there is need for time. But the Atonement as a completed plan
does have a unique relationship *to* time. Until the Atonement is
finished, its various phases will proceed *in* time, but the whole
Atonement stands at time's end. At this point, the bridge of the return
has been built.

<sup>42</sup> The Atonement is a *total* commitment. You still think this is
associated with loss. This is the same mistake *all* the separated ones
make in one way or another. They cannot believe that a defense which
cannot attack *is* the best defense. This is what is meant by “the meek
shall inherit the earth.” They will literally take it over because of
their strength. A two-way defense is inherently weak precisely *because*
it has two edges and can turn against the self very unexpectedly. This
tendency cannot be controlled *except* by miracles.

<sup>43</sup> The miracle turns the defense of Atonement to the protection of the
inner self, which, as it becomes more and more secure, assumes its
natural talent of protecting others. The inner self knows itself as both
a brother *and* a Son. You know that when defenses are disrupted, there is
a period of real disorientation accompanied by fear, guilt, and usually
vacillations between anxiety and depression. This course is different in
that defenses are *not* being disrupted but *reinterpreted*, even though you
may experience it as the same thing. In the reinterpretation of
defenses, only their use for *attack* is lost. Since this means they can
be used only *one* way, they become much stronger and much more
dependable. They no longer oppose the Atonement but greatly facilitate
it.

<sup>44</sup> The Atonement can only be accepted *within* you. You have perceived it
largely as *external* thus far, and that is why your experience of it has
been minimal. The reinterpretation of defenses is essential in releasing
the *inner* light. Since the separation, man's defenses have been used
almost entirely to defend himself *against* the Atonement and thus
maintain the separation. They themselves generally see this as a need to
*protect* the body. The many body fantasies with which men's minds are
engaged arise from the distorted belief that the body can be used as a
means for attaining “atonement.”

<sup>45</sup> Perceiving the body as a temple is only the first step in correcting
this kind of distortion. It alters part of the misperception but not all
of it. It *does* recognize, however, that the concept of Atonement in
physical terms is not appropriate. However, the next step is to realize
that a temple is not a building at all. Its *real* holiness lies in the
*inner* altar around which the building is built. The inappropriate
emphasis men have put on beautiful church buildings is a sign of their
*fear* of Atonement and their unwillingness to reach the altar itself. The
*real* beauty of the temple cannot be seen with the physical eye. The
Spiritual eye, on the other hand, cannot see the building at all because
it has perfect sight. It *can*, however, see the altar with *perfect*
clarity.

<sup>46</sup> For perfect effectiveness, the Atonement belongs at the center of the
inner altar, where it undoes the separation and restores the wholeness
of the mind. Before the separation, the mind was invulnerable to fear
because fear did not exist. Both the separation *and* the fear are
miscreations of the mind which must be undone. This is what is meant by
“the restoration of the temple.” It does not mean the restoration of the
building but the opening of the altar to receive the Atonement. This
heals the separation and places *within* man the one defense against *all*
separation mind-errors which can make him perfectly invulnerable.

<sup>47</sup> The acceptance of the Atonement by everyone is only a matter of time.
In fact, both time *and* matter were created for this purpose. This
appears to contradict free will because of the inevitability of the
final decision. If you review the idea carefully, however, you will
realize that this is not true. Everything is limited in some way by the
manner of its creation. Free will can temporize and is capable of
enormous procrastination. But it cannot depart entirely from its
Creator, Who set the limits on its ability to miscreate by virtue of its
own *real* purpose.

<sup>48</sup> The misuse of will engenders a situation which in the extreme becomes
altogether intolerable. Pain thresholds can be high, but they are not
limitless. Eventually everyone begins to recognize, however dimly, that
there *must* be a better way. As this recognition becomes more firmly
established, it becomes a perceptual turning-point. This ultimately
reawakens the Spiritual eye, simultaneously weakening the investment in
physical sight. The alternating investment in the two types or levels of
perception is usually experienced as conflict for a long time and can
become very acute, but the outcome is as certain as God.

<sup>49</sup> The Spiritual eye literally *cannot see* error and merely looks for
Atonement. All the solutions which the physical eyes seek dissolve in
its sight. The Spiritual eye, which looks within, recognizes immediately
that the altar has been defiled and needs to be repaired and protected.
Perfectly aware of the *right* defense, It passes over all others, looking
past error to truth. Because of the real strength of *Its* vision, It
pulls the will into Its service and impels the mind to concur. This
reestablishes the true power of the will and makes it increasingly
unable to tolerate delay. The mind then realizes with increasing
certainty that delay is only a way of increasing unnecessary pain, which
it need not tolerate at all. The pain threshold drops accordingly, and
the mind becomes increasingly sensitive to what it would once have
regarded as very minor intrusions of discomfort.

<sup>50</sup> The Children of God are *entitled* to perfect comfort, which comes from
a sense of perfect trust. Until they achieve this, they waste themselves
and their true creative powers on useless attempts to make themselves
more comfortable by inappropriate means. But the real means is *already*
provided and does not involve any effort at all on their part. Their
egocentricity usually misperceives this as personally insulting, an
interpretation which obviously arises from their misperception of
themselves. Egocentricity and communion *cannot* coexist. Even the terms
are contradictory.

<sup>51</sup> The Atonement is the only gift that is worthy of being offered to the
altar of God. This is because of the inestimable value of the altar
itself. It was created perfect and is entirely worthy of receiving
perfection. God *is* lonely without His Souls, and *they* are lonely without
Him. Men must learn to perceive the world as a means of *healing* the
separation. The Atonement is the *guarantee* that they will ultimately
succeed.

