---
chapter: Two
ctitle: The Illusion of Separation
title: Healing as Release from Fear
ref: Tx.2.III
---

<sup>52</sup> The emphasis will now be on healing. The miracle is the means, the
Atonement is the principle, and healing is the result. Those who speak
of “a miracle of healing” are combining two orders of reality
inappropriately. Healing is *not* a miracle. The Atonement or the final
miracle is a *remedy*, while any type of healing is a result. The *kind* of
error to which Atonement is applied is irrelevant. Essentially, *all*
healing is the release from fear. To undertake this, you *cannot* be
fearful yourself. You do not understand healing because of your *own*
fear.

<sup>53</sup> A major step in the Atonement plan is to undo error at *all* levels.
Illness, which is really “not-right-mindedness,” is the result of level
confusion in the sense that it always entails the belief that what is
amiss in one level can adversely affect another. We have constantly
referred to miracles as the means of correcting level confusion, and all
mistakes must be corrected at the level on which they occur. Only the
*mind* is capable of error. The body can *act* erroneously, but this is only
because it is responding to mis-thought. The body cannot create, and the
belief that it *can*, a fundamental error, produces all physical symptoms.

<sup>54</sup> All physical illness represents a belief in magic. The whole
distortion which created magic rests on the belief that there is a
creative ability in matter which the mind cannot control. This error can
take two forms—it can be believed that the mind can miscreate *in* the
body or that the body can miscreate in the mind. If it is understood
that the mind, which is the *only* level of creation, cannot create beyond
itself, neither type of confusion need occur.

<sup>55</sup> The reason only the mind can create is more obvious than may be
immediately apparent. The Soul *has been* created. The body is a learning
device for the mind. Learning devices are not lessons in themselves.
Their purpose is merely to facilitate the thinking of the learner. The
most that a faulty use of a learning device can do is to fail to
facilitate learning. It has no power in itself to introduce actual
learning errors.

<sup>56</sup> The body, if properly understood, shares the invulnerability of the
Atonement to two-edged application. This is not because the body is a
miracle but because it is not *inherently* open to misinterpretation. The
body is merely a fact in human experience. Its abilities can be and
frequently are over-evaluated. However, it is almost impossible to deny
its existence. Those who do so are engaging in a particularly unworthy
form of denial. The term “unworthy” here implies simply that it is not
necessary to protect the mind by denying the unmindful. [There is little
doubt that the mind can miscreate.] If one denies this unfortunate
aspect of the mind's power, one is also denying the power itself.

<sup>57</sup> All material means which man accepts as remedies for bodily ills are
merely restatements of magic principles. It was the first level of the
error to believe that the body created its own illness. It is a second
misstep to attempt to heal it through non-creative agents. It does not
follow, however, that the use of these very weak corrective devices is
evil. Sometimes the illness has a sufficiently great hold over a mind to
render a person inaccessible to Atonement. In this case it may be wise
to utilize a compromise approach to mind *and* body, in which something
from the *outside* is temporarily given healing belief.

<sup>58</sup> This is because the *last* thing that can help the non-right-minded, or
the sick, is an *increase* in fear. They are already *in* a fear-weakened
state. If they are inappropriately exposed to an “undiluted” miracle,
they may be precipitated into panic. This is particularly likely to
occur when upside-down perception has induced the belief that miracles
are frightening.

<sup>59</sup> The value of the Atonement does not lie in the manner in which it is
expressed. In fact, if it is truly used, it will inevitably *be* expressed
in whatever way is most helpful to the receiver[, not the giver]. This
means that a miracle, to attain its full efficacy, *must* be expressed in
a language which the recipient can understand *without* fear. It does not
follow by any means that this is the highest level of communication of
which he is capable. It *does* mean, however, that it is the highest level
of communication of which he is capable *now*. The whole aim of the
miracle is to raise the level of communication, not to impose regression
in the improper sense upon it.

<sup>60</sup> Before miracle workers are ready to undertake their function in this
world, it is essential that they fully understand the *fear of release*.
Otherwise, they may unwittingly foster the belief that release is
imprisonment, a belief that is very prevalent. This misperception arose
from the underlying misbelief that harm can be limited to the body. This
was because of the much greater fear that the mind can hurt itself.
Neither error is really meaningful, because the miscreations of the mind
do not really exist. *This* recognition is a far better protective device
than *any* form of level confusion, because it introduces correction at
the level of the error.

<sup>61</sup> It is essential to remember that *only* the mind can create. Implicit
in this is the corollary that correction belongs at the *thought* level.
To repeat an earlier statement and to extend it somewhat, the Soul is
already perfect and therefore does not require correction. The body does
not really exist except as a learning device for the mind. This learning
device is *not* subject to errors of its own because it was created but is
*not* creating. It should be obvious, then, that correcting the creator or
inducing it to give up its miscreations is the only application of
creative ability which is truly meaningful.

<sup>62</sup> Magic is essentially mindless or the miscreative use of the mind.
Physical medications are forms of “spells.” Those who are *afraid* to use
the mind to heal should not attempt to do so. The very fact that they
*are* afraid has made them vulnerable to miscreation. They are therefore
likely to misunderstand any healing they might induce and, because
egocentricity and fear usually occur together, may be unable to accept
the real Source of the healing. Under these conditions, it is safer for
them to rely *temporarily* on physical healing devices, because they
cannot misperceive them as their own creations. As long as their sense
of vulnerability persists, they should be preserved from even attempting
miracles.

<sup>63</sup> We have already said that the miracle is an expression of
miracle-mindedness. Miracle-mindedness merely means right-mindedness in
the sense that we are now using it. The right-minded neither exalt nor
depreciate the mind of the miracle worker or the miracle receiver.
However, as a creative act, the miracle need not await the
right-mindedness of the receiver. In fact, its purpose is to *restore* him
to his right mind. It is essential, however, that the miracle worker be
in his right mind or he will be unable to reestablish right-mindedness
in someone else.

<sup>64</sup> The healer who relies on his *own* readiness is endangering his
understanding. He is perfectly safe as long as he is completely
unconcerned about *his* readiness but maintains a consistent trust in
*mine*. If your miracle working propensities are not functioning properly,
it is *always* because fear has intruded on your right-mindedness and has
literally upset it (or turned it upside-down). All forms of
not-right-mindedness are the result of refusal to accept the Atonement
*for yourself*. If the miracle worker *does* accept it, he places himself in
a position to recognize that those who need to be healed are simply
those who have not realized that right-mindedness is healing.

<sup>65</sup> The *sole* responsibility of the miracle worker is to accept the
Atonement for himself. This means that he recognizes that mind is the
only creative level and that its errors *are* healed by the Atonement.
Once he accepts this, his mind can *only* heal. By denying his mind any
destructive potential and reinstating its purely constructive powers, he
has placed himself in a position where he can undo the level confusion
of others. The message he then gives to others is the truth that *their*
minds are similarly constructive and that *their* miscreations cannot hurt
them. By affirming this, the miracle worker releases the mind from
over-evaluating its own learning device (the body) and restores the mind
to its true position as the learner.

<sup>66</sup> It should be emphasized again that the body does not learn any more
than it creates. As a learning device, it merely follows the learner,
but if it is falsely endowed with self-initiative, it becomes a serious
obstruction to the very learning it should facilitate. *Only* the mind is
capable of illumination. The Soul is already illuminated, and the body
in itself is too dense. The mind, however, can bring *its* illumination *to*
the body by recognizing that density is the opposite of intelligence and
therefore unamenable to independent learning. It is, however, easily
brought into alignment with a mind which has learned to look beyond
density toward light.

<sup>67</sup> Corrective learning always begins with the awakening of the Spiritual
eye and the turning away from the belief in physical sight. The reason
this so often entails fear is because man is afraid of what his
Spiritual eye will see. We said before that the Spiritual eye cannot see
error and is capable only of looking beyond it to the defense of
Atonement. There is no doubt that the Spiritual eye *does* produce extreme
discomfort by what it sees. Yet what man forgets is that the discomfort
is *not* the final outcome of its perception. When the Spiritual eye is
permitted to look upon the defilement of the altar, it also looks
*immediately* toward the Atonement.

<sup>68</sup> *Nothing* the Spiritual eye perceives can induce fear. *Everything* that
results from accurate spiritual awareness is merely channelized toward
correction. Discomfort is aroused only to bring the *need* for correction
forcibly into awareness. What the physical eye sees is *not* corrective
nor can it be corrected by *any* device which can be seen physically. As
long as a man believes in what his physical sight tells him, *all* his
corrective behavior will be misdirected. The *real* vision is obscured,
because man cannot endure to see his own defiled altar. But since the
altar *has* been defiled, his state becomes doubly dangerous unless it *is*
perceived.

<sup>69</sup> The fear of healing arises, in the end, from an unwillingness to
accept the unequivocal fact that healing is necessary. Man is not
willing to look on what he has done *to himself*. Healing is an ability
lent to man after the separation, before which it was completely
unnecessary. Like all aspects of the space-time belief, healing ability
is temporary. However, as long as time persists, healing is needed as a
means for human protection. This is because healing rests on charity,
and charity is a way of perceiving the perfection of another even if he
cannot perceive it himself.

<sup>70</sup> Most of the loftier concepts of which man is capable now are
time-dependent. Charity is really a weaker reflection of a much more
powerful love-encompassment which is *far* beyond any form of charity that
man can conceive of as yet. Charity is essential to right-mindedness in
the limited sense in which right-mindedness can now be attained. Charity
is a way of looking at another *as if* he had already gone far beyond his
actual accomplishments in time. Since his own thinking is faulty, he
cannot see the Atonement for himself or he would have no need for
charity. The charity which is accorded him is both an acknowledgment
that he *is* weak and a recognition that he *could* be stronger.

<sup>71</sup> The way in which both of these perceptions are stated clearly implies
their dependence on time, making it quite apparent that charity lies
within the human limitations, though toward its higher levels. We said
before that only revelation transcends time. The miracle, as an
expression of true human charity, can only shorten time at most. It must
be understood, however, that whenever a man offers a miracle to another,
he is shortening the suffering of *both*. This introduces a correction
into the whole record which corrects retroactively as well as
progressively.

