---
chapter: Two
ctitle: The Illusion of Separation
title: The Meaning of the Last Judgement
ref: Tx.2.VI
---

<sup>106</sup> The Last Judgment is one of the greatest threat concepts in man's
perception. This is only because he does not understand it. Judgment is
not an essential attribute of God. Man brought judgment into being only
because of the separation. After the separation, however, there *was* a
place for judgment as one of the many learning devices which had to be
built into the overall plan. Just as the separation occurred over many
millions of years, the Last Judgment will extend over a similarly long
period and perhaps an even longer one. Its length depends, however, on
the effectiveness of the present speed-up.

<sup>107</sup> We have frequently noted that the miracle is a device for shortening
but not abolishing time. If a sufficient number of people become truly
miracle-minded quickly, the shortening process can be almost
immeasurable. It is essential, however, that these individuals free
themselves from fear sooner than would ordinarily be the case because
they must emerge from the conflict if they are to bring peace to other
minds.

<sup>108</sup> The Last Judgment is generally thought of as a procedure undertaken
by God. Actually it will be undertaken by man with my help. It is a
final healing rather than a meting out of punishment, however much man
may think that punishment is deserved. Punishment is a concept in *total*
opposition to right-mindedness. The aim of the Last Judgment is to
*restore* right-mindedness to man.

<sup>109</sup> The Last Judgment might be called a process of right evaluation. It
simply means that finally all men will come to understand what is worthy
and what is not. After this, their ability to choose can be directed
reasonably. Until this distinction is made, however, the vacillations
between free and imprisoned will cannot *but* continue. The first step
toward freedom *must* entail a sorting out of the false from the true.
This is a process of division only in the constructive sense and
reflects the true meaning of the Apocalypse. Man will ultimately look
upon his own creations and will to preserve only what is good, just as
God Himself looked upon what He had created and knew that it *was* good.

<sup>110</sup> At this point, the will can begin to look with love on its own
creations because of their great worthiness. The mind will inevitably
disown its miscreations which, without the mind's belief, will no longer
exist. The term “Last Judgment” is frightening not only because it has
been falsely projected onto God, but also because of the association of
“last” with death. This is an outstanding example of upside-down
perception. Actually, if the meaning of the Last Judgment is objectively
examined, it is quite apparent that it is really the doorway to life.

<sup>111</sup> No one who lives in fear is really alive. His own last judgment
cannot be directed toward himself because he is not his own creation. He
can, however, apply it meaningfully and at *any* time to everything he has
created and retain in his memory *only* what is good. This is what his
right-mindedness cannot *but* dictate. The purpose of time is solely to
“give him time” to achieve this judgment. It is his own perfect judgment
of his own creations. When everything he retains is loveable, there is
no reason for fear to remain with him. This *is* his part in the
Atonement.

