---
chapter: Two
ctitle: The Illusion of Separation
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.2.I
---

This section deals with a fundamental misuse of knowledge, referred to
in the Bible as the cause of the “fall,” or separation. There are some
definitions which I asked you to take from the dictionary which will be
helpful here. They are somewhat unusual since they are not the first
definitions which are given. Nevertheless, the fact that each of them
does appear in the dictionary should be reassuring.

<sup>2</sup> *Project* (verb): to extend forward or out.<br/>*Project* (noun): a plan in
the mind.<br/>*World*: a natural grand division.

<sup>3</sup> We will refer later to projection as related to both mental health and
mental illness. We have already observed that man can create an empty
shell, but he cannot create nothing at all. This emptiness provides the
screen for the misuse of projection.

<sup>4</sup> The Garden of Eden, which is described as a literal garden in the
Bible, was not an actual garden at all. It was merely a mental state of
complete need-lack. Even in the literal account, it is noteworthy that
the pre-separation state was essentially one in which man needed
nothing. The “tree of knowledge” is also an overly literal figure. These
concepts need to be clarified before the real meaning of the separation,
or the “detour into fear,” can be fully understood.

<sup>5</sup> To “project,” as defined above, is a fundamental attribute of God
which He gave to His Son. In the creation, God projected His creative
ability from Himself to the Souls He created, and He also imbued them
with the same loving will to create. The Soul has not only been fully
created but has also been created perfect. There is *no* emptiness in it.
Because of its likeness to its Creator, it is creative. No Child of God
can lose this ability because it is inherent in what he *is*, but he *can*
use it inappropriately. Whenever projection is used inappropriately, it
*always* implies that some emptiness or lack exists and that it is in
man's ability to put his *own* ideas there *instead* of truth.

<sup>6</sup> If you consider carefully what this entails, the following will become
quite apparent:

<sup>7</sup> First, the assumption is implicit that what God created can be *changed*
by the mind of man.

<sup>8</sup> Second, the concept that what is perfect can be rendered imperfect or
wanting is accepted.

<sup>9</sup> Third, the belief that man can distort the creations of God, *including
himself*, is accepted.

<sup>10</sup> Fourth, the idea that since man can create himself, the direction of
his own creation is up to *him* is implied.

<sup>11</sup> These related distortions represent a picture of what actually
occurred in the separation. None of this existed before, nor does it
actually exist now. The world *was* made as “a natural grand division,” or
a projecting outward of God. That is why everything that He created is
like Him. Projection, as undertaken by God, is very similar to the kind
of inner radiance which the Children of the Father inherit from Him. It
is important to note that the term “project outward” necessarily implies
that the *real* source of projection is internal. This is as true of the
Son as of the Father.

<sup>12</sup> The world, in the original connotation of the term, included both the
proper creation of man by God *and* the proper creation by man in his
right mind. The latter required the endowment of man by God with free
will because *all* loving creation is freely given. Nothing in these
statements implies any sort of level involvement or in fact anything
except one continuous line of creation in which all aspects are of the
same order.

<sup>13</sup> When the “lies of the serpent” were introduced, they were
specifically called “lies” because they are not true. When man listened,
all he heard was untruth. He does not have to continue to believe what
is not true unless he chooses to do so. All of his miscreations can
literally disappear in “the twinkling of an eye” because they are merely
visual misperceptions. Man's Spiritual eye can sleep, but a sleeping eye
can still see. What is seen in dreams seems to be very real. The Bible
mentions that “a deep sleep fell upon Adam,” and nowhere is there any
reference to his waking up.

<sup>14</sup> The history of man in the world as he sees it has not yet been marked
by any genuine or comprehensive reawakening or rebirth. This is
impossible as long as man projects in the spirit of miscreation. It
still remains within him, however, to project as God projected His own
Spirit to him. In reality, this is his *only* choice, because his free
will was given him for his own joy in creating the perfect.

<sup>15</sup> All fear is ultimately reducible to the basic misperception that man
has the ability to *usurp* the power of God. It can only be emphasized
that he neither *can* nor *has been* able to do this. In this fact lies the
real justification for his escape from fear. The escape is brought about
by his acceptance of the Atonement, which places him in a position to
realize that his own errors never really occurred. When the “deep sleep”
fell upon Adam, he was in a condition to experience nightmares *because*
he was asleep. If a light is suddenly turned on while someone is
dreaming a fearful dream, he may initially interpret the light itself as
a part of his own dream and be afraid of it. However, when he awakens
the light is correctly perceived as the release *from* the dream, which is
no longer accorded reality.

<sup>16</sup> It is quite apparent that this release does *not* depend on the kind of
“knowledge” which is nothing more than deceiving lies. The knowledge
which illuminates rather than obscures is the knowledge which not only
*sets* you free, but which also shows you clearly that you *are* free.
Whatever lies you may believe are of no concern to the miracle, which
can heal *any* of them with equal ease. It makes *no* distinctions among
misperceptions. Its *sole* concern is to distinguish between truth on the
one hand and *all* kinds of errors on the other. Some miracles may *seem* to
be of greater magnitude than others. But remember the first point in
this course—that there is *no* order of difficulty in miracles.

<sup>17</sup> In reality, you are perfectly unaffected by all expressions of lack
of love. These can be either from yourself and others or from yourself
*to* others or from others to *you*. Peace is an attribute in *you*. You
cannot find it outside. All mental illness is some form of external
searching. Mental health is *inner* peace. It enables you to remain
unshaken by lack of love from without and capable through your own
miracles of correcting the external conditions which proceed from lack
of love in others.

