---
chapter: Three
ctitle: Retraining the Mind
title: The Loss of Certainty
ref: Tx.3.VII
---

<sup>51</sup> We said before that the abilities which man possesses are only
shadows of his real strengths and that the intrusion of the ability to
perceive, which is inherently judgmental, was introduced only *after* the
separation. No one has been sure of anything since. You will also
remember, however, that I made it clear that the resurrection was the
means for the *return* to knowledge, which was accomplished by the union
of my will with the Father's. We can now make a distinction which will
greatly facilitate clarity in our subsequent statements.

<sup>52</sup> Since the separation, the words “create” and “make” have been greatly
confused. When you make something, you make it out of a sense of lack or
need. Anything that is made is made for a specific purpose and has no
true generalizability. When you make something to fill a perceived lack,
which is obviously why you would want to make anything, you are tacitly
implying that you believe in separation. Knowing, as we have frequently
observed, does not lead to doing at all.

<sup>53</sup> The confusion between your own creation and what *you* create is so
profound that it has become literally impossible for you to know
anything. Knowledge is always stable, and it is quite evident that human
beings are not. Nevertheless, they *are* perfectly stable as God created
them. In this sense, when their behavior is unstable they are
*disagreeing* with God's idea of the creation. Man can do this if he
chooses, but he would hardly *want* to do it if he were in his right mind.
The problem that bothers you most is the fundamental question which man
continually asks of himself, but which cannot properly be directed to
himself at all. He keeps asking himself what he *is*. This implies that
the answer is not only one which he knows but is also one which is up to
him to supply.

<sup>54</sup> Man *cannot* perceive himself correctly. He *has* no image. The word
“image” is always perception-related and *not* a product of [knowing].
Images are symbolic and stand for something else. The current emphasis
on “changing your image” merely recognizes the power of perception, but
it also implies that there is nothing to *know*. Knowing is *not* open to
interpretation. It is possible to “interpret” meaning, but this is
always open to error because it refers to the *perception* of meaning.
Such wholly needless complexities are the result of man's attempt to
regard himself as both separated and unseparated at the same time. It is
impossible to undertake a confusion as fundamental as this without
engaging in further confusion.

<sup>55</sup> Methodologically, man's mind has been very creative but, as always
occurs when method and content are separated, it has not been utilized
for anything but an attempt to escape a fundamental and entirely
inescapable impasse. This kind of thinking cannot result in a creative
outcome, although it has resulted in considerable ingenuity. It is
noteworthy, however, that this ingenuity has almost totally divorced him
from knowledge. Knowledge does not *require* ingenuity. When we say “the
truth shall set you free,” we mean that all this kind of thinking is a
waste of time, but that you *are* free of the need to engage in it if you
are willing to let it go.

<sup>56</sup> Prayer is a way of asking for something. Prayer is the medium of
miracles, but the only meaningful prayer is for forgiveness, because
those who have been forgiven *have* everything. Once forgiveness has been
accepted, prayer in the usual sense becomes utterly meaningless.
Essentially, a prayer for forgiveness is nothing more than a request
that we may be able to *recognize* something we already have. In electing
to perceive instead of to know, man placed himself in a position where
he could resemble his Father *only* by miraculously perceiving. He has
lost the knowledge that he *himself* is a miracle. Miraculous creation was
his Source and also his real function.

<sup>57</sup> “God created man in His own image and likeness” is correct in
meaning, but the words are open to considerable misinterpretation. This
is avoided, however, if “image” is understood to mean “thought” and
“likeness” is taken as “of a like quality.” God *did* create the Soul in
His own Thought and of a quality like to His own. There is nothing else.
Perception, on the other hand, is impossible *without* a belief in “more”
and “less.” Perception at every level involves selectivity and is
incapable of organization without it. In all types of perception, there
is a continual process of accepting and rejecting or organizing and
reorganizing, of shifting and changing focus. Evaluation is an essential
part of perception, because judgments *must* be made for selection.

<sup>58</sup> What happens to perceptions if there *are* no judgments and there is
nothing but perfect equality? Perception becomes impossible. Truth can
only be *known*. All of it is equally true, and knowing any part of it *is*
to know all of it. Only perception involves partial awareness. Knowledge
transcends *all* the laws which govern perception because partial
knowledge is impossible. It is all one and *has* no separate parts. You
who are really one with it need but know *yourself*, and your knowledge is
complete. To know God's miracle is to know Him.

<sup>59</sup> Forgiveness is the healing of the perception of separation. Correct
perception *of each other* is necessary, because minds have willed to see
themselves as separate. Each Soul knows God completely. That *is* the
miraculous power of the Soul. The fact that each one has this power
completely is a fact that is entirely alien to human thinking, in which
if anyone has everything, there is nothing *left*. God's miracles are as
total as His Thoughts because they *are* His Thoughts.

<sup>60</sup> As long as perception lasts, prayer has a place. Since perception
rests on lack, those who perceive have not totally accepted the
Atonement and given themselves over to truth. Perception *is* a separated
state, and a perceiver *does* need healing. Communion, not prayer, is the
natural state of those who know. God and His miracles *are* inseparable.
How beautiful indeed are the Thoughts of God who live in His light! Your
worth is beyond perception because it is beyond doubt. Do not perceive
yourself in different lights. *Know* yourself in the One Light where the
miracle that is you is perfectly clear.

