---
chapter: Three
ctitle: Retraining the Mind
title: Judgement and the Authority Problem
ref: Tx.3.VIII
---

<sup>61</sup> We have already discussed the Last Judgment in some though
insufficient detail. After the Last Judgment there will be no more. This
is symbolic only in the sense that everyone is much better off *without*
judgment. When the Bible says, “Judge not that ye be not judged” it
merely means that if you judge the reality of others at all, you will be
unable to avoid judging your own. The choice to judge rather than to
know was the cause of the loss of peace. Judgment is the process on
which perception, but *not* cognition, rests. We have discussed this
before in terms of the selectivity of perception, pointing out that
evaluation is its obvious prerequisite.

<sup>62</sup> Judgment *always* involves rejection. It is *not* an ability which
emphasizes only the positive aspects of what is judged, whether it be in
or out of the self. However, what has been perceived and rejected—or
judged and found wanting—remains in the unconscious because it *has* been
perceived. One of the illusions from which man suffers is the belief
that what he judged against has no effect. This cannot be true unless he
also believes that what he judged against does not exist. He evidently
does *not* believe this, or he would not have judged against it. It does
not matter in the end whether you judge right or wrong. Either way, you
are placing your belief in the unreal. This cannot be avoided in any
type of judgment, because it implies the belief that reality is yours to
choose *from*.

<sup>63</sup> You have no idea of the tremendous release and deep peace that comes
from meeting yourselves and your brothers totally without judgment. When
you recognize what you and your brothers are, you will realize that
judging them in *any* way is without meaning. In fact, their meaning is
lost to you precisely because you are judging them. All uncertainty
comes from a totally fallacious belief that you are under the coercion
of judgment. You do not need judgment to organize your life, and you
certainly do not need it to organize yourselves. In the presence of
knowledge, *all* judgment is automatically suspended, and this is the
process which enables recognition to *replace* perception.

<sup>64</sup> Man is very fearful of everything he has perceived but has refused to
accept. He believes that, because he has refused to accept it, he has
lost control over it. This is why he sees it in nightmares or in
pleasant disguises in what seem to be his happier dreams. Nothing that
you have refused to accept can be brought into awareness. It does *not*
follow that it is dangerous, but it *does* follow that you have *made* it
dangerous.

<sup>65</sup> When you feel tired, it is merely because you have judged yourself as
capable of being tired. When you laugh at someone, it is because you
have judged him as debased. When you laugh at yourself, you are
singularly likely to laugh at others, if only because you cannot
tolerate the idea of being more debased than they are. All of this does
make you feel tired because it is essentially disheartening. You are not
*really* capable of being tired, but you are *very* capable of wearying
yourselves. The strain of constant judgment is virtually intolerable. It
is a curious thing that any ability which is so debilitating should be
so deeply cherished.

<sup>66</sup> Yet, if you wish to be the author of reality, which is totally
impossible anyway, you *will* insist on holding onto judgment. You will
also use the term with considerable fear, believing that judgment will
someday be used against *you*. To whatever extent it is used against you,
it is due only to your belief in its efficacy as a weapon of defense for
your own authority. The issue of authority is really a question of
authorship. When an individual has an “authority problem,” it is *always*
because he believes he is the author of himself, projects his delusion
onto others, and then perceives the situation as one in which people are
literally fighting him for his authorship. This is the fundamental error
of all those who believe they have usurped the power of God.

<sup>67</sup> The belief is very frightening to *them* but hardly troubles God. He
is, however, eager to undo it, *not* to punish His Children, but *only*
because He knows that it makes them unhappy. Souls were *given* their true
Authorship, but men preferred to be anonymous when they chose to
separate themselves from their Author. The word “authority” has been one
of their most fearful symbols ever since.  Authority has been used for
great cruelty because, being uncertain of their true Authorship, men
believe that their creation was anonymous. This has left them in a
position where it *sounds* meaningful to consider the possibility that
they must have created themselves.

<sup>68</sup> The dispute over authorship has left such uncertainty in the minds of
men that some have even doubted whether they really exist at all.
Despite the apparent contradiction in this position, it is in one sense
more tenable than the view that they created themselves. At least it
acknowledges the fact that *some* true authorship is necessary for
existence.

<sup>69</sup> Only those who give over all desire to reject can *know* that their own
rejection is impossible. You have *not* usurped the power of God, but you
*have* lost it. Fortunately, when you lose something, it does not mean
that the “something” has gone. It merely means that you do not know
where it is. Existence does not depend on your ability to identify it
nor even to place it. It is perfectly possible to look on reality
without judgment and merely *know* that it is there.

<sup>70</sup> Peace is a natural heritage of the Soul. Everyone is free to refuse
to *accept* his inheritance, but he is *not* free to establish what his
inheritance *is*. The problem which everyone must decide is the
fundamental question of authorship. All fear comes ultimately and
sometimes by way of very devious routes from the denial of Authorship.
The offense is never to God, but only to those who deny Him. To deny His
Authorship is to deny themselves the reason for their own peace, so that
they see themselves only in pieces. This strange perception *is* the
authority problem.

<sup>71</sup> There is no man who does not feel that he is imprisoned in some way.
If this is the result of his own free will, he must regard his will as
if it were *not* free, or the obviously circular reasoning involved in his
position would be quite apparent. Free will *must* lead to freedom.
Judgment *always* imprisons because it separates segments of reality
according to the highly unstable scales of desire. Wishes are not facts
by definition. To wish is to imply that willing is not sufficient. Yet
no one believes that what is wished is as real as what is willed.
Instead of, “Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven” say, “*Will* ye first
the Kingdom of Heaven,” and you have said, “I know what I am, and I will
to accept my own inheritance.”

