---
chapter: Eighteen
ctitle: The Dream and the Reality
title: The Purpose of the Body
ref: Tx.18.IX
---

<sup>71</sup> It is only the awareness of the body that makes love seem limited.
For the body *is* a limit on love. The belief in limited love was its
origin, and it was *made* to limit the unlimited. Think not that this is
merely allegorical, for it was made to limit *you*. Can you who see
yourselves within a body know yourself as an *idea*? Everything you
recognize you identify with externals, something outside itself. You
cannot even think of God without a body or some form you think you
recognize.

<sup>72</sup> The body cannot *know*. And while you limit your awareness to its
tiny senses, you will not see the grandeur which surrounds you. God
cannot come into a body, nor can you join Him there. Limits on love will
always seem to shut Him out and to keep you apart from Him. The body is
a tiny fence around a little part of a glorious and complete idea. It
draws a circle, infinitely small, around a very little segment of Heaven
splintered from the whole, proclaiming that within it is your kingdom,
where God can enter not.

<sup>73</sup> Within this kingdom the ego rules, and cruelly. And to defend this
little speck of dust, it bids you fight against the universe. This
fragment of your mind is such a tiny part of it that, could you but
appreciate the whole, you would see instantly that it is like the
smallest sunbeam to the sun or like the faintest ripple on the surface
of the ocean. In its amazing arrogance, this tiny sunbeam has decided it
*is* the sun; this almost imperceptible ripple hails itself as the
ocean. Think how alone and frightened is this little thought, this
infinitesimal illusion, holding itself apart against the universe. The
sun becomes the sunbeam's “enemy” which would devour it, and the ocean
terrifies the little ripple and wants to swallow it.

<sup>74</sup> Yet neither sun nor ocean is even aware of all this strange and
meaningless activity. They merely continue, unaware that they are feared
and hated by a tiny segment of themselves. Even that segment is not lost
to them, for it could not survive *apart* from them. And what it thinks
it is in no way changes its total dependence on them for its being. Its
whole existence still remains in them. Without the sun the sunbeam would
be gone; the ripple without the ocean is inconceivable.

<sup>75</sup> Such is the strange position in which those in a world inhabited by
bodies seem to be. Each body seems to house a separate mind, a
disconnected thought living alone and in no way joined to the Thought by
which it was created. Each tiny fragment seems to be self-contained,
needing each other for some things but by no means totally dependent on
their one Creator for everything and needing the whole to give them any
meaning, for by themselves they *do* mean nothing. Nor *have* they any
life apart and by themselves.

<sup>76</sup> Like to the sun and ocean your Self continues, unmindful that this
tiny part regards itself *as* you. It is not missing; it could not exist
if it were separate, nor would the whole be whole without it. It is not
a separate kingdom, ruled by an idea of separation from the rest. Nor
does a fence surround it, preventing it from joining with the rest and
keeping it apart from its Creator. This little aspect is no different
from the whole, being continuous with it and at one with it. It leads no
separate life because its life *is* the oneness in which its being was
created.

<sup>77</sup> Do not accept this little fenced-off aspect as yourself. The sun and
ocean are as nothing beside what you are. The sunbeam sparkles only in
the sunlight, and the ripple dances as it rests upon the ocean. Yet in
neither sun nor ocean is the power that rests in you. Would you remain
within your tiny kingdom, a sorry king, a bitter ruler of all he surveys
who looks on nothing, yet who would still die to defend it? This little
self is not your kingdom. Arched high above it and surrounding it with
love is the glorious whole, which offers all its happiness and deep
content to every part. The little aspect which you think you set apart
is no exception.

<sup>78</sup> Love knows no bodies and reaches to everything created like itself.
Its total lack of limit *is* its meaning. It is completely impartial in
its giving, encompassing only to preserve and keep complete what it
would give. In your tiny kingdom, you have so little! Should it not,
then, be there that you would call on love to enter? Look at the desert,
dry and unproductive, scorched and joyless, which makes up your little
kingdom. And realize the life and joy which love would bring to it from
where it comes and where it would return with you.

<sup>79</sup> The Thought of God surrounds your little kingdom, waiting at the
barrier you built to come inside and shine upon the barren ground. See
how life springs up everywhere! The desert becomes a garden, green and
deep and quiet, offering rest to those who lost their way and wander in
the dust. Give them a place of refuge, prepared by love for them where
once a desert was. And everyone you welcome will bring love with him
from Heaven for you. They enter one by one into this holy place, but
they will not depart as they had come, alone. The love they brought with
them will stay with them, as it will stay with *you*. And under its
beneficence, your little garden will expand and reach out to everyone
who thirsts for living water but has grown too weary to go on alone.

<sup>80</sup> Go out and find them, for they bring your Self with them. And lead
them gently to your quiet garden and receive their blessing there. So
will it grow and stretch across the desert, leaving no lonely little
kingdoms locked away from love and leaving *you* inside. And you will
recognize yourself and see your little garden gently transformed into
the Kingdom of Heaven with all the love of its Creator shining upon it.
The holy instant is your invitation to love, to enter into your bleak
and joyless kingdom, and to transform it into a garden of peace and
welcome.

<sup>81</sup> Love's answer is inevitable. It will come because you came without
the body and interposed no barriers which would interfere with its glad
coming. In the holy instant, you ask of love only what it offers
everyone, neither less nor more. *Asking* for everything, you will
*receive* it. And your shining Self will lift the tiny aspect which you
tried to hide from Heaven straight *into* Heaven. No part of love calls
on the whole in vain. No Son of God remains outside His Fatherhood.

<sup>82</sup> Be sure of this—love has entered your special relationship and
entered fully at your weak request. You do not recognize that love has
come because you have not yet let go of all the barriers you hold
against each other. And you will not be able to give love welcome
separately. You could no more know God alone than He knows you without
your brother. But *together* you could no more be unaware of love than
love could know you not or fail to recognize itself in you.

<sup>83</sup> You have reached the end of an ancient journey, not realizing yet
that it is over. You are still worn and tired and the desert's dust
still seems to cloud your eyes and keep you sightless. Yet He Whom you
welcomed has come to you and would welcome *you*. He has waited long to
give you this. Receive it now of Him, for He would have you know Him.
Only a little wall of dust still stands between you. Blow on it lightly
and with happy laughter, and it will fall away. And walk into the garden
love has prepared for *both* of you.

