---
chapter: Eighteen
ctitle: The Dream and the Reality
title: The Passing of the Dream
ref: Tx.18.XI
---

<sup>95</sup> This course will *lead* to knowledge, but knowledge itself is still
beyond the scope of our curriculum. Nor is there any need for us to try
to speak of what must forever lie beyond words. We need remember only
that whoever attains the real world, beyond which learning cannot go,
*will* go beyond it but in a different way. Where learning ends there
God begins, for learning ends before Him Who is complete where He begins
and where there *is* no end. It is not for us to dwell on what *cannot*
be attained. There is too much to learn. The readiness for knowledge
still must be attained.

<sup>96</sup> Love is not learned. Its meaning lies in itself. And learning ends
when you have recognized all it is *not*. That is the interference; that
is what needs to be undone. Love is not learned because there never was
a time in which you knew it not. Learning is useless in the Presence of
your Creator, Whose acknowledgment of you and yours of Him so far
transcend all learning that everything you learned is meaningless,
replaced forever by the knowledge of love and its one meaning.

<sup>97</sup> Your relationship has been uprooted from the world of shadows, and
its unholy purpose has been safely brought through the barriers of
guilt, washed with forgiveness, and set shining and firmly rooted in the
world of light. From there, it calls to you to follow the course it
took, lifted high above the darkness and gently placed before the gates
of Heaven. The holy instant in which you were united is but the
messenger of love, sent from beyond forgiveness to remind you of all
that lies beyond it. Yet it is through forgiveness that it will *be*
remembered.

<sup>98</sup> And when the memory of God has come to you in the holy place of
forgiveness, you will remember nothing else, and memory will be as
useless as learning, for your only purpose will be creating. Yet this
you cannot know until every perception has been cleansed and purified
and finally removed forever. Forgiveness removes only the *untrue*,
lifting the shadows from the world and carrying it safe and sure within
its gentleness to the bright world of new and clean perception. There is
your purpose *now*. And it is there that peace awaits you.

