---
chapter: Eighteen
ctitle: The Dream and the Reality
title: Substitution as a Defense
ref: Tx.18.II
---

<sup>4</sup> You who believe that God is fear made but one substitution. It has
taken many forms because it was the substitution of illusion for truth,
of fragmentation for wholeness. It has become so splintered and
subdivided and divided again, over and over, that it is now almost
impossible to perceive it once was one and still is what it was. That
one error, which brought truth to illusion, infinity to time, and life
to death, was all you ever made. Your whole world rests upon it.
Everything you see reflects it, and every special relationship which you
have ever made is part of it.

<sup>5</sup> You have expressed surprise at hearing how very different is reality
from what you see. You do not realize the magnitude of that one error.
It was so vast and so completely incredible that from it a world of
total unreality *had* to emerge. What else *could* come of it? Its
fragmented aspects are fearful enough, as you begin to look at them. But
nothing you have seen begins to show you the enormity of the original
error, which seemed to cast you out of Heaven, to shatter knowledge into
meaningless bits of disunited perceptions, and to force you to further
substitutions.

<sup>6</sup> That was the first projection of error outward. The world arose to
hide it and became the screen on which it was projected and drawn
between you and the truth. For truth extends *inward*, where the idea of
loss is meaningless and only increase is conceivable. Do you really
think it strange that a world in which everything is backwards and
upside-down arose from this? \[*It was inevitable*.\] For truth brought
to *this* could only remain within in quiet and take no part in all the
mad projection by which this world was made. Call it not sin but
madness, for such it was, and so it still remains. Invest it not with
guilt, for guilt implies it was accomplished in reality. And above all,
be not *afraid* of it. When you seem to see some twisted form of the
original error rise to frighten you, say only, “God is not fear, but
love,” and it will disappear.

<sup>7</sup> The truth will *save* you. It has not left you to go out into the mad
world and so depart from you. Inward is sanity; insanity is *outside*
you. You but *believe* it is the other way; that truth is outside and
error and guilt within. Your little senseless substitutions, touched
with insanity and swirling lightly off on a mad course like feathers
dancing insanely in the wind, have *no* substance. They fuse and merge
and separate in shifting and totally meaningless patterns which need not
be judged at all. To judge them individually is pointless. Their tiny
differences in form are no real differences at all. *None* of them
matters. *That* they have in common and nothing else. Yet what else is
*necessary* to make them all the same?

<sup>8</sup> Let them all go, dancing in the wind, dipping and turning till they
disappear from sight, far, far outside you. And turn you to the stately
calm within, where in holy stillness dwells the living God you never
left and Who never left you. The Holy Spirit takes you gently by the
hand and retraces with you your mad journey outside yourself, leading
you gently back to the truth and safety within. He brings all your
insane projections and your wild substitutions which you have placed
outside you to the truth. Thus He reverses the course of insanity and
restores you to reason.

<sup>9</sup> In your relationship, where He has taken charge of everything at your
request, He has set the course inward to the truth you share. In the mad
world outside you, nothing can be shared but only substituted, and
sharing and substituting have nothing in common in reality. Within
yourselves you love each other with a perfect love. Here is holy ground
in which no substitution can enter and where only the truth about each
other can abide. Here you are joined in God, as much together as you are
with Him. The original error has not entered here, nor ever will. Here
is the radiant truth to which the Holy Spirit has committed your
relationship. Let Him bring it here, where *you* would have it be. Give
Him but a little faith in each other, to help Him show you that no
substitute you made for Heaven can keep you from it. In you there *is*
no separation, and no substitute can keep you from each other. Your
reality was God's creation and *has* no substitute.

<sup>10</sup> You are so firmly joined in truth that only God is there. And He
would never accept something else instead of you. He loves you both,
equally and as one. And as He loves you, so you *are*. You are not
joined together in illusions but in the Thought so holy and so perfect
that illusions cannot remain to darken the holy place in which you stand
together. God is with you, my brothers. Let us join in Him in peace and
gratitude and accept His gift as our most holy and perfect reality,
which we share in Him.

<sup>11</sup> Heaven is restored to all the Sonship through your relationship, for
in it lies the Sonship, whole and beautiful, safe in your love. Heaven
has entered quietly, for all illusions have been gently brought unto the
truth in you and love has shined upon you, blessing your relationship
with truth. God and His whole creation have entered it together. How
lovely and how holy is your relationship, with the truth shining upon
it! Heaven beholds it and rejoices that you have let it come to you.
\[And God Himself is glad that your relationship is as it was created.\]
The universe within you stands with you, together. And Heaven looks with
love on what is joined in it, along with its Creator.

<sup>12</sup> Whom God has called should hear no substitutes. Their call is but an
echo of the original error which shattered Heaven. And what became of
peace in those who heard? Return with me to Heaven, walking together out
of this world and through another to the loveliness and joy the other
holds within it. Would you still further weaken and break apart what is
already broken and hopeless? Is it here that you would look for
happiness? Or would you not prefer to heal what has been broken and join
in making whole what has been ravaged by separation and disease?

<sup>13</sup> You have been called together to the most holy function that this
world contains. It is the only one which has no limits and reaches out
to every broken fragment of the Sonship with healing and uniting
comfort. This is offered *you* in your holy relationship. Accept it
here, and you will give as you have accepted. The peace of God is given
you with the glowing purpose in which you join. The holy light that
brought you together must extend, as *you* accepted it.

