---
chapter: Eighteen
ctitle: The Dream and the Reality
title: The Little Willingness
ref: Tx.18.V
---

<sup>32</sup> The holy instant is the result of your determination to be holy. It
is the *answer*. The desire and the willingness to let it come precedes
its coming. You prepare your minds for it only to the extent of
recognizing that you want it above all else. It is not necessary that
you do more; indeed, it is necessary that you realize that you *cannot*
do more. Do not attempt to give the Holy Spirit what He does not ask, or
you will add the ego unto Him and confuse the two. He asks but little.
It is *He* who adds the greatness and the might. He joins with you to
make the holy instant far greater than you can understand. It is your
realization that you need do so little that enables Him to give so much.

<sup>33</sup> Trust not your good intentions. They are not enough. But trust
implicitly your willingness, whatever else may enter. Concentrate only
on this and be not disturbed that shadows surround it. That is why you
came. If you could come without them, you would not *need* the holy
instant. Come to it not in arrogance, assuming that you must achieve the
state its coming brings with it. The miracle of the holy instant lies in
your willingness to let it be what it is. And in your willingness for
this lies also your acceptance of yourself as *you* were meant to be.

<sup>34</sup> Humility will never ask that you remain content with littleness. But
it *does* require that you be *not* content with less than greatness,
which comes not of you. Your difficulty with the holy instant arises
from your fixed conviction that you are not worthy of it. And what is
this but the determination to be as you would *make* yourself? God did
not create His dwelling-place unworthy of Him. And if you believe He
cannot enter where He wills to be, you must be *interfering* with His
Will. You do not need the strength of willingness to come from *you*,
but only from *His* Will.

<sup>35</sup> The holy instant does not come from your little willingness alone. It
is always the result of your small willingness combined with the
unlimited power of God's Will. You have been wrong in thinking that it
is needful to *prepare* yourself for Him. It is impossible to make
arrogant preparations for holiness and *not* believe that it is up to
you to establish the conditions for peace. *God* has established them.
They do not wait upon your willingness for what they are. Your
willingness is needed only to make it possible to *teach* you what they
are. If you maintain you are unworthy of learning this, you are
interfering with the lesson by believing that you make the *learner*
different. You did not make the learner, nor *can* you make him
different. Would you first make a miracle yourself and then expect one
to be made *for* you?

<sup>36</sup> *You* merely ask the question. The answer is *given*. Seek not to
answer it, but merely *receive* the answer as it is given. In preparing
for the holy instant, do not attempt to make yourself holy to be ready
to receive it. That is but to confuse your role with God's. Atonement
cannot come to those who think that *they* must first atone, but only to
those who offer it nothing more than simple willingness to make way for
it. Purification is of God alone and therefore for you. Rather than seek
to prepare yourself for Him, try to think thus:

<sup>37</sup> *I who am host to God **am**<br/> worthy of Him.<br/>
He Who established His dwelling-place in me created it<br/>
as He would have it be.<br/>
It is not needful that I make it ready for Him,<br/>
But only that I do not interfere with His plan to restore to<br/>
me my own awareness of my readiness, which is eternal.<br/>
I need add nothing to His plan.<br/>
But to receive it, I must be willing not to substitute my own in place of it*.

<sup>38</sup> And that is all. Add more and you will merely *take away* the little
that is asked. Remember you made guilt and that your plan for the
escape from guilt has been to bring Atonement *to* it and make salvation
fearful. And it is only fear that you will add if you prepare *yourself*
for love. The preparation for the holy instant belongs to Him Who gives
it. Release yourselves to Him Whose function is release. Do not assume
His function for Him. Give Him but what He asks, that you may learn how
little is your part and how great is His.

<sup>39</sup> It is this that makes the holy instant so easy and so natural. You
make it difficult because you insist there must be more that you need
do. \[You find it difficult to *accept* the idea that you need give so
*little* to receive so much.\] And it is very hard for you to realize
that it is not personally insulting that your contribution and the Holy
Spirit's are so extremely disproportionate. You are still convinced
*your* understanding is a powerful contribution to the truth and makes
it what it is. Yet we have emphasized that you need understand nothing.
Salvation is easy just *because* it asks nothing that you cannot give
*right now*.

<sup>40</sup> Forget not that it has been your decision to make everything that
*is* natural and easy for you impossible. What you believe to be
impossible will *be* if God so wills it, but you will remain quite
unaware of it. If you believe the holy instant is difficult for you, it
is because you have become the arbiter of what is possible and remain
unwilling to give place to One Who *knows*. The whole belief in orders
of difficulty in miracles is centered on this. Everything God wills is
not only possible but has already *happened*. And that is why the past
has gone. It *never* happened in reality. Only in your minds, which
thought it did, is its undoing needful.

