---
chapter: Eighteen
ctitle: The Dream and the Reality
title: Dreams and the Body
ref: Tx.18.VII
---

<sup>49</sup> There is *nothing* outside you. That is what you must ultimately
learn, for it is \[in that\] realization that the Kingdom of Heaven is
restored to you. For God created only this, and He did not depart from
it nor leave it separate from Himself. The Kingdom of Heaven is the
dwelling-place of the Son of God, who left not his Father and dwells not
apart from Him. Heaven is not a place nor a condition. It is merely an
awareness of perfect Oneness and the knowledge that there is nothing
else; nothing outside this Oneness and nothing else within.

<sup>50</sup> What could God give but knowledge of Himself? What else *is* there to
give? The belief that you could give and *get* something else, something
*outside* yourself, has cost you the awareness of Heaven and the loss of
your Identity. And you have done a stranger thing than you yet realize.
You have displaced your guilt to your bodies from your minds. Yet a body
*cannot* be guilty, for it can do nothing of itself. You who think you
hate your bodies deceive yourselves. You hate your *minds*, for guilt
has entered into them, and they would remain separate, which they cannot
do.

<sup>51</sup> Minds *are* joined; bodies are not. Only by assigning to the mind the
properties of the body does separation seem to be possible. And it is
*mind* that seems to be fragmented and private and alone. Its guilt,
which *keeps* it separate, is projected to the body, which suffers and
dies because it is attacked, to hold the separation in the mind and let
it *not know* its identity. Mind cannot attack, but it *can* make
fantasies and direct the body to act them out. Yet it is never what the
body does that seems to satisfy. Unless the mind believes the body is
actually acting out its fantasies, it will attack the body by increasing
the projection of its guilt upon it.

<sup>52</sup> In this, the mind is clearly delusional. It cannot attack, but it
maintains it *can* and uses what it does to hurt the body to *prove* it
can. The mind cannot attack, but it *can* deceive itself. And this is
all it does when it believes it has attacked the body. It can project
its guilt, but it will not *lose* it through projection. And though it
clearly can misperceive the function of the body, it cannot change its
function from what the Holy Spirit establishes it to be. The body was
not made by love. Yet love does not condemn it and can use it lovingly,
respecting what the Son of God has made and using it to save him from
illusions.

<sup>53</sup> Would you not have the instruments of separation reinterpreted as
means for salvation and used for purposes of love? Would you not welcome
and support the shift from fantasies of vengeance to release from them?
Your perception of the body can clearly be sick, but project not this
upon the body. For your wish to make destructive what cannot destroy can
have no real effect at all. And what God created is only what He would
have it be, being His Will. You *cannot* make His Will destructive. You
can make fantasies in which your will conflicts with His, but that is
all.

<sup>54</sup> It is insane to use the body as the scapegoat for guilt, directing
its attack and blaming it for what you wished it to do. It is
*impossible* to act out fantasies. For it is still the *fantasies* you
want, and they have nothing to do with what the body does. *It* does not
dream of them, and they but make it a liability where it could be an
asset. For fantasies have made your body your “enemy,” weak, vulnerable,
and treacherous, worthy of the hate which you invest in it. How has this
served you? You have *identified* with this thing you hate, the
instrument of vengeance and the perceived source of your guilt. You have
done this to a thing that has no meaning, proclaiming it to be the
dwelling-place of the Son of God and turning it against him.

<sup>55</sup> This is the host of God that *you* have made. And neither God nor His
most holy Son can enter an abode which harbors hate and where you have
sown the seeds of vengeance, violence, and death. This thing you made to
serve your guilt stands between you and other minds. The minds *are*
joined, but you do not identify with them. You see yourself locked in a
separate prison, removed and unreachable, incapable of reaching out as
being reached. You hate this prison you have made and would destroy it.
But you would not escape from it, leaving it unharmed, without your
guilt upon it.

<sup>56</sup> Yet only thus *can* you escape. The home of vengeance is not yours;
the place you set aside to house your hate is not a prison but an
illusion of *yourself*. The body is a limit imposed on the universal
communication which is an eternal property of mind. But the
communication is *internal*. \[It is *not* made up of different *parts*
which reach each other.\] Mind reaches to *itself*. It does not go
*out*. Within itself it has no limits, and there is nothing outside it.
\[It encompasses *everything*.\] It encompasses you entirely; you within
it, and it within you. There is nothing else, anywhere or ever.

<sup>57</sup> The body is outside you, and but *seems* to surround you, shutting
you off from others and keeping you apart from them \[and them from
you\]. It is not there. There *is* no barrier between God and His Son,
nor can His Son be separated from himself except in illusions. This is
not his reality, though he believes it is. Yet this could only be if God
were wrong. God would have had to create differently and to have
separated Himself from His Son to make this possible. He would have had
to create different things and to establish different *orders* of
reality, only *some* of which were love. Yet love must be forever like
itself, changeless forever and forever without alternative. And so it
is. You cannot put a barrier around yourself because God placed none
between Himself and you.

<sup>58</sup> You can stretch out your hand and reach to Heaven. You whose hands
are joined have begun to reach beyond the body, but *not* outside
yourselves, to reach your shared Identity *together*. Could this be
*outside* you? Where God is *not*? Is *He* a body, and did He create you
as He is not and where He cannot be? You are surrounded only by *Him*.
What limit can there be on you whom He encompasses? Everyone has
experienced what he would call a sense of being transported beyond
himself. This feeling of liberation far exceeds the dream of freedom
sometimes experienced in special relationships. It is a sense of actual
*escape* from limitations.

<sup>59</sup> If you will consider what this “transportation” really entails, you
will realize that it is a sudden unawareness of the body and a joining
of yourself and something else in which your mind enlarges to encompass
it. It becomes part of you as you unite with it. And both become whole
as neither is perceived as separate. What really happens is that you
have given up the illusion of a limited awareness and lost your fear of
union. The love that instantly replaces it *extends* to what has freed
you and unites with it. And while this lasts, you are not uncertain of
your Identity and would not limit it. You have escaped from fear to
peace, asking no questions of reality but merely accepting it. You have
accepted this *instead* of the body and have let yourself be one with
something beyond it simply by not letting your mind be *limited* by it.

<sup>60</sup> This can occur regardless of the physical distance which seems to be
between you and what you join, of your respective positions in space,
and of your differences in size and seeming quality. Time is not
relevant; it can occur with something past, present, or anticipated. The
“something” can be anything and anywhere—a sound, a sight, a thought, a
memory, and even a general idea without specific reference. Yet in every
case, you joined it without reservation because you love it and would be
with it. And so you rush to meet it, letting your limits melt away,
suspending all the “laws” your body obeys and gently setting them aside.

<sup>61</sup> There is no violence at all in this escape. The body is not attacked,
but simply properly *perceived*. It does not limit you merely because
you would not have it so. You are not really “lifted out” of it; it
cannot *contain* you. You go where you would be, gaining, not losing, a
sense of self. In these instants of release from physical restrictions,
you experience much of what happens in the holy instant; the lifting of
the barriers of time and space, the sudden experience of peace and joy,
and, above all, the lack of awareness of the body and of the questioning
whether or not all this is possible.

<sup>62</sup> It is possible because you *want* it. The sudden expansion of the
self which takes place with your desire for it is the irresistible
appeal the holy instant holds. It calls to you to be yourself within its
safe embrace. There are the laws of limit lifted *for* you, to welcome
you to openness of mind and freedom. Come to this place of refuge, where
you can be yourself in peace. Not through destruction, not through a
“breaking out,” but merely by a quiet “melting in.” For peace will join
you there simply because you have been willing to let go the limits you
have placed upon love and joined it where it is and where it led you in
answer to its gentle call to *be* at peace.

