---
chapter: Eighteen
ctitle: The Dream and the Reality
title: “I Need do Nothing.”
ref: Tx.18.VIII
---

<sup>63</sup> You still have too much faith in the body as a source of strength.
What plans do you make that do not involve its comfort or protection or
enjoyment in some way? This makes it an end and not a means in your
interpretation, and this *always* means you still find sin attractive.
No one accepts Atonement for himself who still accepts sin as his goal.
You have thus not met your *one* responsibility. Atonement is not
welcomed by those who prefer pain and destruction.

<sup>64</sup> You have made much progress and are really trying to make still more,
but there is one thing you have never done—not for one instant have you
utterly forgotten the body. It has faded at times from your sight, but
it has not yet completely disappeared. You are not asked to let this
happen for more than an instant, yet it is in this instant that the
miracle of Atonement happens. Afterwards, you will see the body again,
but never quite the same. And every instant that you spend *without*
awareness of it gives you a different view of it when you return.

<sup>65</sup> At no single instant does the body exist at all. It is always
remembered or anticipated, but never experienced just *now*. Only its
past and future make it seem real. Time controls it entirely, for sin is
never present. In any single instant, the attraction of guilt would be
experienced as pain and nothing else and would be avoided. It has no
attraction *now*. Its whole attraction is imaginary and therefore *must*
be thought of in the past or in the future.

<sup>66</sup> It is impossible to accept the holy instant without reservation
unless just for an instant you are willing to see *no* past or future.
You cannot prepare for it *without* placing it in the future. Release is
given you the instant you desire it. Many have spent a lifetime in
preparation and have indeed achieved their instants of success. This
course does not attempt to teach more than they learned in time, but it
does aim at *saving* time. You are attempting to follow a very long road
to the goal you have accepted. It is extremely difficult to reach
Atonement by fighting against sin. \[Enormous effort is expended in the
attempt to make holy what is hated and despised.\] Nor is a lifetime of
contemplation and long periods of meditation aimed at detachment from
the body necessary. All such attempts will ultimately succeed because of
their purpose. Yet the means are tedious and very time consuming, for
all of them look to the *future* for release from a state of present
unworthiness and inadequacy.

<sup>67</sup> Your way will be different, not in purpose but in means. A holy
relationship is a means of *saving time*. One instant spent *together*
restores the universe to *both* of you. You *are* prepared. Now you need
but to remember you need do *nothing*. It would be far more profitable
now merely to concentrate on this than to consider what you *should* do.
When peace comes at last to those who wrestle with temptation and fight
against the giving in to sin; when the light comes at last into the mind
given to contemplation; or when the goal is finally achieved by anyone,
it *always* comes with just one happy realization: “I need do nothing.”

<sup>68</sup> Here is the ultimate release which everyone will one day find in his
own way, at his own time. We do not need this time. Time has been saved
for you because you are together. This is the special means this course
is using to save you time. You are not making use of the course if you
insist on using means which have served others well, neglecting what was
made for *you*. Save time for me by only this *one* preparation and
practice, doing nothing else. “I need do nothing” is a statement of
allegiance, a truly undivided loyalty. Believe it for just one instant,
and you will accomplish more than is given to a century of contemplation
or of struggle against temptation.

<sup>69</sup> To *do* anything involves the body. And if you recognize you *need*
do nothing, you have withdrawn the body's value from your mind. Here is
the quick and open door through which you slip past centuries of effort
and escape from time. This is the way in which sin loses all attraction
*right now*. For here is time denied and past and future gone. Who need
do nothing has no need for time. To do nothing is to rest and make a
place within you where the activity of the body ceases to demand
attention. Into this place the Holy Spirit comes and there abides. He
will remain when you forget and the body's activities return to occupy
your conscious mind.

<sup>70</sup> Yet there will always be this place of rest to which you can return.
And you will be more aware of this quiet center of the storm than all
its raging activity. This quiet center, in which you do nothing, will
remain with you, giving you rest in the midst of every busy doing on
which you are sent. For from this center will you be directed how to use
the body sinlessly. It is this center, from which the body is absent,
that will keep it so in your awareness of it.

