---
chapter: Eighteen
ctitle: The Dream and the Reality
title: The Happy Dream
ref: Tx.18.VI
---

<sup>41</sup> Prepare you *not* for the undoing of what never was. If you already
understood the difference between truth and illusion, the Atonement
would have no meaning. The holy instant, your holy relationship, the
Holy Spirit's teaching, and all the means by which salvation is
accomplished would have no purpose. For they are all but aspects of the
plan to change your dreams of fear to happy dreams from which you waken
easily to knowledge. Put yourself not in charge of this, for you cannot
distinguish between advance and retreat. Some of your greatest advances
you have judged as failures, and some of your deepest retreats you have
evaluated as success.

<sup>42</sup> Never approach the holy instant after *you* have tried to remove all
fear and hatred from your mind. That is *its* function. Never attempt to
overlook your guilt *before* you ask the Holy Spirit's help. That is
*His* function. Your part is only to offer Him a little willingness to
*let* Him remove all fear and hatred and to *be* forgiven. On your
little faith, joined with His understanding, *He* will build your part
in the Atonement and make sure that you fulfill it easily. And with Him
*you* will build a ladder planted in the solid rock of faith and rising
even to Heaven. Nor will you use it to ascend to Heaven alone.

<sup>43</sup> Through your holy relationship, reborn and blessed in every holy
instant which you do not arrange, thousands will rise to Heaven with
you. Can *you* plan for this? Or could you prepare *yourselves* for such
a function? Yet it is possible because God wills it. Nor will He change
His Mind about it. The means and purpose *both* belong to Him. You have
accepted one; the other will be provided. A purpose such as this without
the means is inconceivable. He will provide the means to *anyone* who
shares His purpose.

<sup>44</sup> Happy dreams come true, *not* because they are dreams, but only
because they are *happy*. And so they must be loving. Their message is,
“Thy will be done,” and not, “I want it otherwise.” The alignment of
means and purpose is an undertaking impossible for you to understand.
You do not even realize you *have* accepted the Holy Spirit's purpose as
your own, and you would merely bring unholy means to its accomplishment.
The little faith it needed to change the purpose is all that is required
to receive the means and *use* them.

<sup>45</sup> It is no dream to love your brother as yourself. Nor is your holy
relationship a dream. All that remains of dreams within it is that it is
still a *special* relationship. Yet it is very useful to the Holy
Spirit, Who *has* a special function here. It will become the happy
dream through which He can spread joy to thousands on thousands who
believe that love is fear, not happiness. Let Him fulfill the function
that He gave to your relationship by accepting it *for* you, and nothing
will be wanting that would make of it what He would have it be.

<sup>46</sup> When you feel the holiness of your relationship is threatened by
anything, stop instantly and offer the Holy Spirit your willingness *in
spite* of fear to let Him exchange this instant for the holy one which
you would rather have. He will never fail in this. But forget not that
your relationship is one, and so it must be that whatever threatens the
peace of one is an equal threat to the other. The power of joining and
its blessing lie in the fact that it is now impossible for either of you
to experience fear alone or to attempt to deal with it alone. Never
believe that this is necessary or even possible. Yet just as this is
impossible, so is it equally impossible that the holy instant come to
either of you *without* the other. And it will come to *both* at the
request of either.

<sup>47</sup> Whichever is saner at the time when the threat is perceived should
remember how deep is his indebtedness to the other and how much
gratitude is due him and be glad that he can pay his debt by bringing
happiness to both. Let him remember this, and say:

<sup>48</sup> *I desire this holy instant for myself<br/>
That I may share it with my brother, whom I love.<br/>
It is not possible that I can have it without him, or he without me.<br/>
Yet it is wholly possible for us to share it **now**.<br/>
And so I choose this instant as the one to offer to the Holy Spirit,<br/>
That His blessing may descend on us and keep us **both** in peace*.

