---
chapter: Eighteen
ctitle: The Dream and the Reality
title: The Basis of the Dream
ref: Tx.18.III
---

<sup>14</sup> Does not a world that seems quite real arise in dreams? Yet think
what this world is. It is clearly *not* the world you saw before you
slept. Rather, it is a distortion of the world, planned solely around
what you would have preferred. Here, you are “free” to make over
whatever seemed to attack you and change it into a tribute to your ego,
which was outraged by the “attack.” This would not *be* your wish unless
you saw yourself as one with the ego, which always looks upon itself and
therefore on you as under attack and highly vulnerable to it.

<sup>15</sup> Dreams are chaotic *because* they are governed by your conflicting
wishes, and therefore they have no *concern* with what is true. They are
the best example you could have of how perception can be utilized to
substitute illusions for truth. You do not take them seriously on
awaking because the fact that reality is so outrageously violated in
them becomes apparent. Yet they are a way of looking at the world and
changing it to suit the ego better. They provide striking examples both
of the ego's inability to tolerate reality and your willingness to
*change* reality on its behalf.

<sup>16</sup> You do not find the differences between what you see in sleep and on
awaking disturbing. You recognize that what you see on waking is blotted
out in dreams. Yet on awakening, you do not expect it to be gone. In
dreams *you* arrange everything. People become what you would have them
be, and what they do *you* order. No limit on substitution is laid upon
you. For a time, it seems as if the world were given you, to make it
what you will. You do not realize that you are *attacking* it, trying to
triumph over it and make it serve you.

<sup>17</sup> Dreams are perceptual temper tantrums in which you literally scream,
“I want it *thus*!” And thus it seems to be. And yet the dream cannot
escape its origin. Anger and fear pervade it, and in an instant, the
illusion of satisfaction is invaded by the illusion of terror. For the
dream of your ability to control reality by substituting a world which
you prefer *is* terrifying. Your attempts to blot out reality are very
fearful, but this you are not willing to accept. And so you substitute
the fantasy that *reality* is fearful, not what you would *do* to it.
And thus is guilt made real.

<sup>18</sup> Dreams show you that you *have* the power to make a world as you
would have it be, and that because you *want* it, you *see* it. And
while you see it, you do not doubt that it is real. Yet here is a world,
clearly within your mind, that seems to be *outside*. You do not respond
to it as though you made it, nor do you realize that the emotions which
the dream produces *must* come from you. It is the figures in the dream
and what *they* do that seem to make the dream. You do not realize that
you are making them act out for *you*, for if you did, the guilt would
not be theirs, and the illusion of satisfaction would be gone. In dreams
these features are not obscure. You seem to waken, and the dream is
gone. Yet what you fail to recognize is that what caused the dream has
not gone with it.

<sup>19</sup> Your wish to make another world that is not real *remains* with you.
And what you seem to wake to is but another form of this same world you
see in dreams. All your time is spent in dreaming. Your sleeping and
your waking dreams have different forms, and that is all. Their
*content* is the same. They are your protest against reality and your
fixed and insane idea that you can change it. In your waking dreams, the
special relationship \[has a special place. It is the means by which you
try to make your *sleeping* dreams *come true*. From this you do not
awaken. The special relationship\] is your determination to keep your
hold on unreality and to prevent yourself from waking. And while you see
more value in sleeping than in waking, you will not let go of it.

<sup>20</sup> The Holy Spirit, ever practical in His wisdom, accepts your dreams
and uses them as means for waking. *You* would have used them to remain
asleep. We once said that the first change, before dreams disappear, is
that your dreams of fear are changed to happy dreams. That is what the
Holy Spirit does in your special relationship. He does not destroy it
nor snatch it away from you. \[But He does use it differently, as a help
to make *His* purpose *real* to you.\] Your special relationship will
remain, not as a source of pain and guilt, but as a source of joy and
freedom. It will not be for you alone, for therein lay its misery. As
its unholiness kept it a thing apart, its holiness will become an
offering to everyone.

<sup>21</sup> Your special relationship will be a means for undoing guilt in
everyone blessed through your holy relationship. It will be a happy
dream, and one which you will share with all who come within your sight.
Through it, the blessing which the Holy Spirit has laid upon it will be
extended. Think not that He has forgotten anyone in the purpose He has
given you. And think not that He has forgotten you to whom He gave the
gift. He uses everyone who calls on Him as means for the salvation of
everyone. And He will waken everyone through you who offered your
relationship to Him. If you but recognized His gratitude! Or mine
through His! For we are joined as in one purpose, being of one mind with
Him.

<sup>22</sup> Let not the dream take hold to close your eyes. It is not strange
that dreams can make a world that is unreal. The *wish* to make it is
incredible. Your relationship has become one in which the wish has been
removed because its purpose has been changed from one of dreams to one
of truth. You are not sure of this because you think it may be *this*
that is the dream. You are so used to choosing between dreams you do not
see that you have made, at last, the choice between the truth and *all*
illusions.

<sup>23</sup> Yet Heaven is sure. This is no dream. Its coming means that you have
chosen truth, and it has come because you have been willing to let your
special relationship meet its conditions. In your relationship, the Holy
Spirit has gently laid the real world—the world of happy dreams from
which awaking is so easy and so natural. For as your sleeping and your
waking dreams represent the same wishes in your mind, so do the real
world and the truth of Heaven join in the Will of God. The dream of
waking is easily transferred to its reality. For this dream comes from
your will joined with the Will of God. And what this will would have
accomplished has never *not* been done.

