---
chapter: Twenty Nine
ctitle: The Awakening
title: The Lingering Illusion
ref: Tx.29.VIII
---

<sup>43</sup> Seek not outside yourself. For it will fail, and you will weep each
time an idol falls. Heaven cannot be found where it is not, and there
can be no peace excepting there. Each idol that you worship when God
calls will never answer in His place. There *is* no other answer you can
substitute and find the happiness His answer brings. Seek not outside
yourself. For all your pain comes simply from a futile search for what
you want, insisting where it must be found. What if it is not there? Do
you prefer that you be right or happy? Be you glad that you are told
where happiness abides and seek no longer elsewhere. You *will* fail.
But it is given you to know the truth and not to seek for it outside
yourself.

<sup>44</sup> No one who comes here but must still have hope, some lingering
illusion, or some dream that there is something outside of himself that
will bring happiness and peace to him. If everything is in him, this
cannot be so. And therefore by his coming, he denies the truth about
himself and seeks for something *more* than everything, as if a part of
it were separated off and found where all the rest of it is not. This is
the purpose he bestows upon the body—that it seek for what he lacks and
give him what would make himself complete. And thus he wanders aimlessly
about in search of something that he cannot find, believing that he is
what he is not.

<sup>45</sup> The lingering illusion will impel him to seek out a thousand idols
and to seek beyond them for a thousand more. And each will fail him, all
excepting one; for he will die and does not understand the idol that he
seeks *is* but his death. Its form appears to be outside himself. Yet
does he seek to kill God's Son within and prove that he is victor over
him. This is the purpose every idol has, for this the role that is
assigned to it, and this the role that cannot *be* fulfilled.

<sup>46</sup> Whenever you attempt to reach a goal in which the body's betterment
is cast as major beneficiary, you try to bring about your death. For you
believe that you can suffer lack, and lack *is* death. To sacrifice is
to give up and thus to be without and to have suffered loss. And by this
giving up is life renounced. Seek not outside yourself. The search
implies you are not whole within and fear to look upon your devastation
and prefer to seek outside yourself for what you are.

<sup>47</sup> Idols must fall *because* they have no life, and what is lifeless
*is* a sign of death. You came to die, and what would you expect but to
*perceive* the signs of death you seek? No sadness and no suffering
proclaims a message other than an idol found that represents a parody of
life which in its lifelessness is really death, conceived as real and
given living form. Yet each must fail and crumble and decay because a
form of death cannot be life, and what is sacrificed cannot be whole.

<sup>48</sup> All idols of this world were made to keep the truth within from being
known to you and to maintain allegiance to the dream that you must find
what is outside yourself to be complete and happy. It is vain to worship
idols in the hope of peace. God dwells within, and your completion lies
in Him. No idol takes His place. Look not to idols. Do not seek outside
yourself. Let us forget the purpose of the world the past has given it.
For otherwise, the future *will* be like the past and but a series of
depressing dreams in which all idols fail you one by one, and you see
death and disappointment everywhere.

<sup>49</sup> To change all this and open up a road of hope and of release in what
appeared to be an endless circle of despair, you need but to decide you
do not *know* the purpose of the world. You give it goals it does not
have, and thus do you decide what it is for. You try to see in it a
place of idols found outside yourself, with power to make complete what
is within by splitting what you are between the two. You *choose* your
dreams, for they are what you wish, perceived as if it had been given
you. Your idols do what you would have them do and have the power you
ascribe to them. And you pursue them vainly in the dream because you
want their power as your own.

<sup>50</sup> Yet where are dreams but in a mind asleep? And can a dream succeed in
making real the pictures it projects outside itself? Save time, my
brothers; learn what time is *for*. And speed the end of idols in a
world made sad and sick by seeing idols there. Your holy minds are
altars unto God, and where He is, no idols can abide. The fear of God is
but the fear of loss of idols. It is not the fear of loss of your
reality. But you have made of your reality an idol which you must
protect against the light of truth. And all the world becomes the means
by which this idol can be saved. Salvation thus appears to threaten life
and offer death.

<sup>51</sup> It is not so. Salvation seeks to prove there *is* no death, and
*only* life exists. The sacrifice of death is *nothing* lost. An idol
*cannot* take the place of God. Let Him remind you of His love for you,
and do not seek to drown His Voice in chants of deep despair to idols of
yourself. Seek not outside your Father for your hope. For hope of
happiness is *not* despair.

