---
chapter: Twenty Nine
ctitle: The Awakening
title: The Closing of the Gap
ref: Tx.29.II
---

<sup>4</sup> The gap between you is not one of space between two separate bodies.
This but seems to be dividing off your separate minds. It is the symbol
of a promise made to meet when you prefer and separate until you both
elect to meet again. And then your bodies seem to get in touch and
signify a meeting-place to join. But always is it possible to go your
separate ways. Conditional upon the “right” to separate will you agree
to meet from time to time and keep apart in intervals of separation,
which protect you from the “sacrifice” of love. The body *saves* you,
for it gets away from total sacrifice and gives you time in which to
build again your separate selves, which you believe diminish as you
meet.

<sup>5</sup> The body *could* not separate your minds unless you wanted it to be a
cause of separation and of distance seen between you. Thus do you endow
it with a power that lies not within itself. And herein lies its power
over *you*. For now you think that it determines when you meet and
limits your ability to make communion with each other's mind. And now it
tells you where to go and how to go there, what is feasible for you to
undertake, and what you cannot do. It dictates what its health can
tolerate and what will tire it and make it sick. And its “inherent”
weaknesses set up the limitations on what you would do and keep your
purpose limited and weak.

<sup>6</sup> The body *will* accommodate to this if you would have it so. It will
allow but limited indulgences in “love,” with intervals of hatred in
between. And it will take command of when to “love” and when to shrink
more safely into fear. It will be sick because you do not know what
loving means. And so you *must* misuse each circumstance and everyone
you meet and see in them a purpose not your own.

<sup>7</sup> It is not love that asks a sacrifice. But fear *demands* the sacrifice
of love, for in love's presence fear cannot abide. For hate to be
maintained love *must* be feared and only sometimes present, sometimes
gone. Thus is love seen as treacherous because it seems to come and go
uncertainly and offer no stability to you. You do not see how limited
and weak is your allegiance and how frequently you have demanded that
love go away and leave you quietly alone in “peace.”

<sup>8</sup> The body, innocent of any goal, is your excuse for variable goals
*you* hold and force the body to maintain. You do not fear its weakness,
but its lack of strength *or* weakness. Would you recognize that nothing
stands between you? Would you know there *is* no gap behind which you
can hide? There is a shock that comes to those who learn their savior is
their enemy no more. There is a wariness that is aroused by learning
that the body is not real. And there are overtones of seeming fear
around the happy message, “God is love.”

<sup>9</sup> Yet all that happens when the gap is gone is peace eternal. Nothing
more than that, and nothing less. Without the fear of God, what could
induce you to abandon Him? What toys or trinkets in the gap could serve
to hold you back an instant from His love? Would you allow the body to
say “no” to Heaven's calling, were you not afraid to find a loss of self
in finding God? Yet *can* your Self be lost by being found?

