---
chapter: Twenty Nine
ctitle: The Awakening
title: Dream Roles
ref: Tx.29.V
---

<sup>25</sup> Do you believe that truth can be but *some* illusions? They are
dreams *because* they are not true. Their equal lack of truth becomes
the basis for the miracle, which means that you have understood that
dreams are dreams and that escape depends not on the dream, but only on
awaking. Could it be some dreams are kept and others wakened from? The
choice is not between which dreams to keep, but only if you want to live
in dreams or to awaken from them. Thus it is the miracle does not select
some dreams to leave untouched by its beneficence. You cannot dream some
dreams and wake from some, for you are either sleeping or awake. And
dreaming goes with only one of these.

<sup>26</sup> The dreams you think you like would hold you back as much as those in
which the fear is seen. For *every* dream is but a dream of fear, no
matter what the form it seems to take. The fear is seen within, without,
or both. Or it can be disguised in pleasant form. But never is it absent
from the dream, for fear is the material of dreams from which they all
are made. Their form can change, but they cannot be made of something
else. The miracle were treacherous indeed if it allowed you still to be
afraid because you did not *recognize* the fear. You would not then be
willing to awake, for which the miracle prepares the way.

<sup>27</sup> In simplest form it can be said attack is a response to function
unfulfilled as *you* perceive the function. It can be in you or someone
else, but where it is perceived, it will be there it is attacked.
Depression or assault must be the theme of every dream, for they are
made of fear. The thin disguise of pleasure and of joy in which they may
be wrapped but slightly veils the heavy lump of fear which is their
core. And it is *this* the miracle perceives, and not the wrappings in
which it is bound.

<sup>28</sup> When you are angry, is it not because someone has failed to fill the
function *you* allotted him? And does not this become the “reason” your
attack is justified? The dreams you think you like are those in which
the functions you have given have been filled, the needs which you
ascribe to you are met. It does not matter if they be fulfilled or
merely wanted. It is the idea that they *exist* from which the fears
arise. Dreams are not wanted more or less. They are desired or not. And
each one represents some function which you have assigned, some goal
which an event, or body, or a thing *should* represent and *should*
achieve for you. If it succeeds, you think you like the dream. If it
should fail, you think the dream is sad. But whether it succeeds or
fails is not its core but just the flimsy covering.

<sup>29</sup> How happy would your dreams become if you were *not* the one who gave
the “proper” role to every figure which the dream contains. No one can
fail but your *idea* of him, and there is no betrayal *but* of this. The
core of dreams the Holy Spirit gives is *never* one of fear. The
coverings may not appear to change, but what they mean *has* changed
because they cover something else. Perceptions are determined by their
purpose in that they seem to *be* what they are *for*. A shadow figure
who attacks becomes a brother giving you a chance to help if this
becomes the function of the dream. And dreams of sadness thus are turned
to joy.

<sup>30</sup> What *is* your brother for? You do not know because *your* function
is obscure to you. Do not ascribe a role to him which you imagine would
bring happiness to you. And do not try to hurt him when he fails to take
the part which you assigned to him in what you dream your life was meant
to be. He asks for help in every dream he has, and you have help to give
him if you see the function of the dream as He perceives its function,
Who can utilize all dreams as means to serve the function given Him.
Because He loves the dreamer not the dream, each dream becomes an
offering of love. For at its center is His love for you, which lights
whatever form it takes with love.

