---
chapter: Twenty Nine
ctitle: The Awakening
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.29.I
---

There is no time, no place, no state where God is absent. There is
nothing to be feared. There is no way in which a gap could be conceived
of in the wholeness that is His. The compromise the least and littlest
gap would represent in His eternal love is quite impossible. For it
would mean His love could harbor just a hint of hate; His gentleness
turn sometimes to attack; and His eternal patience sometimes fail. All
this do you believe, when you perceive a gap between your brother and
yourself. How could you trust Him, then? For He must be deceptive in His
Love. Be wary, then; let Him not come too close, and leave a gap between
you and His love through which you can escape if there be need for you
to flee.

<sup>2</sup> Here is the fear of God most plainly seen. For love *is* treacherous
to those who fear, since fear and hate can never be apart. No one who
hates but is afraid of love and therefore *must* he be afraid of God.
Certain it is he knows not what love means. He fears to love and loves
to hate, and so he thinks that love is fearful—hate is love. This is the
consequence the little gap must bring to those who cherish it and think
that it is their salvation and their hope.

<sup>3</sup> The fear of God! The greatest obstacle that peace must flow across has
not yet gone. The rest are past, but this one still remains to block
your path and make the way to light seem dark and fearful, perilous and
bleak. You had decided that your brother is your enemy. Sometimes a
friend, perhaps, provided that your separate interests made your
friendship possible a little while. But not without a gap between you,
lest he turn again into an enemy. \[Let him come close to you, and you
jumped back; as you approached, he instantly withdrew.\] A cautious
friendship, limited in scope and carefully restricted in amount, became
the treaty you had made with him. You shared a qualified entente in
which a clause of separation was a point on which you both agreed to
keep intact. And violating this was thought to be a breach of treaty not
to be allowed.

