---
chapter: Twenty Nine
ctitle: The Awakening
title: The Forgiving Dream
ref: Tx.29.X
---

<sup>61</sup> The slave of idols is a *willing* slave. For willing he must be to
let himself bow down in worship to what has no life and seek for power
in the powerless. What happened to the holy Son of God that this could
be his wish—to let himself fall lower than the stones upon the ground
and look to idols that they raise him up? Hear then your story in the
dream you made, and ask yourself if it be not the truth that you believe
that it is *not* a dream. A dream of judgment came into the mind that
God created perfect as Himself. And in that dream was Heaven changed to
hell, and God made enemy unto His Son.

<sup>62</sup> How can God's Son awaken from the dream? It is a dream of judgment.
So must he judge not, and he *will* waken. For the dream will seem to
last while he is part of it. Judge not, for he who judges *will* have
need of idols which will hold the judgment off from resting on himself.
Nor can he know the Self he has condemned. Judge not, because you make
yourself a part of evil dreams where idols are your “true” identity and
your salvation from the judgment laid in terror and in guilt upon
yourself.

<sup>63</sup> All figures in the dream are idols made to save you from the dream.
Yet they are *part* of what they have been made to save you *from*. Thus
does an idol *keep* the dream alive and terrible, for who could wish for
one unless he were in terror and despair? And this the idol represents,
and so its worship *is* the worship of despair and terror and the dream
from which they come. Judgment is an injustice to God's Son, and it *is*
justice that who judges him will not escape the penalty he laid upon
himself within the dream he made. God knows of justice, not of penalty.
But in the dream of judgment, you attack and are condemned and wish to
be the slave of idols which are interposed between your judgment and the
penalty it brings.

<sup>64</sup> There *can* be no salvation in the dream as you are dreaming it. For
idols must be part of it to save you from what you believe you have
accomplished and have done to make you sinful and put out the light
within you. Little children, it is there. You do but dream, and idols
are the toys you dream you play with. Who has need of toys but children?
They pretend they rule the world and give their toys the power to move
about and talk and think and feel and speak for *them*. Yet everything
their toys appear to do is in the minds of those who play with them. But
they are eager to forget that they made up the dream in which their toys
are real, nor recognize their wishes are their own.

<sup>65</sup> Nightmares are childish dreams. The toys have turned against the
child who thought he made them real. Yet *can* a dream attack? Or *can*
a toy grow large and dangerous and fierce and wild? This does the child
believe because he fears his thoughts and gives them to the toys
instead. And their reality becomes his own because they seem to *save*
him from his thoughts. Yet do they keep his thoughts alive and real but
seen outside himself, where they can turn against him for his treachery
to them. He thinks he *needs* them that he may escape his thoughts,
because he thinks the thoughts are real. And so he makes of anything a
toy to make his world remain outside himself, and play that *he* is but
a part of *it.*

<sup>66</sup> There is a time when childhood should be passed and gone forever.
Seek not to retain the toys of children. Put them all away, for you have
need of them no more. The dream of judgment is a children's game in
which the child becomes the father, powerful, but with the little wisdom
of a child. What hurts him is destroyed; what helps him, blessed. Except
he judges this as does a child, who does not know what hurts and what
will heal. And bad things seem to happen, and he is afraid of all the
chaos in a world he thinks is governed by the laws he made. Yet is the
real world unaffected by the world he thinks is real. Nor have its laws
been changed because he did not understand.

<sup>67</sup> The real world still is but a dream. Except the figures have been
changed. They are not seen as idols which betray. It is a dream in which
no one is used to substitute for something else nor interposed between
the thoughts the mind conceives and what it sees. No one is used for
something he is not, for childish things have all been put away. And
what was once a dream of judgment now has changed into a dream where all
is joy because that is the *purpose* which it has. Only forgiving dreams
can enter here, for time is almost over. And the forms which enter in
the dream are now perceived as brothers, not in judgment but in love.

<sup>68</sup> Forgiving dreams have little need to last. They are not made to
separate the mind from what it thinks. They do not seek to prove the
dream is being dreamed by someone else. And in these dreams a melody is
heard which everyone remembers, though he has not heard it since before
all time began. Forgiveness, once complete, brings timelessness so close
the song of Heaven can be heard, not with the ears, but with the
holiness which never left the altar which abides forever deep within the
Son of God. And when he hears this song again, he knows he never heard
it not. And where is time, when dreams of judgment have been put away?

<sup>69</sup> Whenever you feel fear in any form—and you *are* fearful if you do
not feel a deep content, a certainty of help, a calm assurance Heaven
goes with you—be sure you made an idol and believe it will betray you.
For beneath your hope that it will save you lie the guilt and pain of
self-betrayal and uncertainty, so deep and bitter that the dream cannot
conceal completely all your sense of doom. Your self-betrayal *must*
result in fear, for fear *is* judgment, leading surely to the frantic
search for idols and for death.

<sup>70</sup> Forgiving dreams remind you that you live in safety and have not
attacked yourself. So do your childish terrors melt away and dreams
become a sign that you have made a new beginning, not another try to
worship idols and to *keep* attack. Forgiving dreams are kind to
everyone who figures in the dream. And so they bring the dreamer full
release from dreams of fear. He does not fear his judgment, for he has
judged no one, nor has sought to be released through judgment from what
judgment must impose. And all the while he is remembering what he forgot
when judgment seemed to be the way to *save* him from its penalty.

