---
chapter: Twenty Nine
ctitle: The Awakening
title: Christ and Anti-Christ
ref: Tx.29.IX
---

<sup>52</sup> What is an idol? Do you think you know? For idols are unrecognized as
such and never seen for what they really are. That is the only power
which they have. Their *purpose* is obscure, and they are feared and
worshiped both *because* you do not know what they are for and why they
have been made. An idol is an image of your brother which you would
value more than what he *is*. Idols are made that he may be replaced, no
matter what their form. And it is this which never is perceived and
recognized. Be it a body or a thing, a place, a situation or a
circumstance, an object owned or wanted, or a right demanded or
achieved, it is the same.

<sup>53</sup> Let not their form deceive you. Idols are but substitutes for your
reality. In some way, you believe they will complete your little self
\[and let you walk in\] safety in a world perceived as dangerous, with
forces massed against your confidence and peace of mind. They have the
power to supply your lacks and add the value which you do not have. No
one believes in idols who has not enslaved himself to littleness and
loss. And thus must seek beyond his little self for strength to raise
his head and stand apart from all the misery the world reflects. This is
the penalty for looking not within for certainty and quiet calm which
liberates you from the world and lets you stand apart in quiet and in
peace \[unlimited\].

<sup>54</sup> An idol is a false impression or a false belief—some form of
anti-Christ which constitutes a gap between the Christ and what you see.
An idol is a wish made tangible and given form and thus perceived as
real and seen outside the mind. Yet it is still a thought and cannot
leave the mind that is its source. Nor is its form apart from the idea
it represents. All forms of anti-Christ oppose the Christ and fall
before His face like a dark veil which seems to shut you off from Him,
alone in darkness. Yet the light is there. A cloud does not put out the
sun. No more a veil can banish what it seems to separate nor darken by
one whit the light itself.

<sup>55</sup> This world of idols *is* a veil across the face of Christ because its
*purpose* is to separate your brother from yourself. A dark and fearful
purpose, yet a thought without the power to change one blade of grass
from something living to a sign of death. Its form is nowhere, for its
source abides within your mind, where God abideth not. Where is this
place where what is everywhere has been excluded and been kept apart?
What hand could be held up to block God's way? Whose voice could make
demand He enter not? The “more-than-everything” is not a thing to make
you tremble and to quail in fear. Christ's enemy is nowhere. He can take
no form in which he *ever* will be real.

<sup>56</sup> What is an idol? Nothing! It must be believed before it seems to come
to life and *given* power that it may be feared. Its life and power are
its believer's gift, and this is what the miracle restores to what *has*
life and power worthy of the gift of Heaven and eternal peace. The
miracle does not restore the truth, the light the veil between has not
put out. It merely lifts the veil and *lets* the truth shine
unencumbered, being what it is. It does not need belief to be itself,
for it *has been* created, so it *is.* An idol is *established* by
belief, and when it is withdrawn, the idol “dies.”

<sup>57</sup> This is the anti-Christ—the strange idea there is a power past
omnipotence, a place beyond the infinite, a time transcending the
eternal. Here the world of idols has been set by the idea this power and
place and time are given form and shape the world where the impossible
has happened. Here the deathless come to die, the all-encompassing to
suffer loss, the timeless to be made the slaves of time. Here does the
changeless change, the peace of God, forever given to all living things,
give way to chaos, and the Son of God, as perfect, sinless and as loving
as his Father, come to hate a little while, to suffer pain, and finally
to die.

<sup>58</sup> Where is an idol? Nowhere! Can there be a gap in what is infinite, a
place where time can interrupt eternity? A place of darkness set where
all is light, a dismal alcove separated off from what is endless, *has*
no place to be. An idol is beyond where God has set all things forever
and has left no room for anything to be *except* His Will. Nothing and
nowhere must an idol be while God is everything and everywhere.

<sup>59</sup> What purpose has an idol, then? What is it *for*? This is the only
question which has many answers, each depending on the one of whom the
question has been asked. The world *believes* in idols. No one comes
unless he worshiped them and still attempts to seek for one that yet
might offer him a gift reality does not contain. Each worshiper of idols
harbors hope his special deities will give him more than other men
possess. It *must* be more. It does not really matter more of what—more
beauty, more intelligence, more wealth, or even more affliction and more
pain. But *more* of something is an idol *for*. And when one fails,
another takes its place with hope of finding more of something else. Be
not deceived by forms the “something” takes. An idol is a means for
getting *more*. And it is *this* that is against God's Will.

<sup>60</sup> God has not many sons, but only One. Who can have more, and who be
given less? In Heaven would the Son of God but laugh if idols could
intrude upon his peace. It is for him the Holy Spirit speaks and tells
you idols *have* no purpose here. For more than Heaven can you never
have. If Heaven is within, why would you seek for idols which would make
of Heaven less, to give you more than God bestowed upon your brother and
on you as one with Him? God *gave* you all there is. And to be sure you
could not lose it, did He also give the same to every living thing as
well. And thus *is* every living thing a part of you, as of Himself. No
idol can establish you as *more* than God. But you will never be content
with being *less*.

