---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: Atonement as a Lesson in Sharing
ref: Tx.9.III
---

<sup>9</sup> Atonement is for all, because it is the way to *undo* the belief that
anything is for you alone. To forgive is to *overlook*. Look, then,
*beyond* error, and do not let your perception rest *upon* it, for you
will believe what your perception holds. Accept as true only what your
brother *is* if you would know yourself. Perceive what he is *not*, and
you cannot know what you are, *because* you see him falsely. Remember
always that your identity is shared and that its sharing *is* its
reality.

<sup>10</sup> You have a part to play in the Atonement, but the plan of the
Atonement *is* beyond you. You do not know how to overlook errors, or
you would not make them. It would merely be further error to think
either that you do *not* make them or that you can correct them
*without* a Guide to correction. And if you do not *follow* this Guide,
your errors will *not* be corrected. The plan is not yours, *because* of
your limited ideas of what you are. This limitation is where *all*
errors arise. The way to undo them, therefore, is not *of* you but *for*
you.

<sup>11</sup> The Atonement is a lesson in sharing, which is given you because *you
have forgotten how to do it*. The Holy Spirit merely reminds you of what
is your natural ability. By reinterpreting the ability to attack, which
you *did* make, into the ability to *share*, He translates what you have
made into what God created. If you would accomplish this *through* Him,
you cannot look on your abilities through the eyes of the ego, or you
will judge them as *it* does. All their harmfulness lies in its
judgment. All their helpfulness lies in the judgment of the Holy Spirit.

<sup>12</sup> The ego, too, has a plan of forgiveness because you are *asking* for
one, though not of the right teacher. The ego's plan, of course, *makes
no sense* and *will not work.* By following it, you will merely place
yourself in an impossible situation to which the ego *always* leads you.
The ego's plan is to have you see error clearly *first* and *then*
overlook it. Yet how can you overlook what you have made real? By seeing
it clearly, you *have* made it real and *cannot* overlook it.

<sup>13</sup> This is where the ego is forced to appeal to “mysteries” and begins
to insist that you must accept the meaningless to save yourself. Many
have tried to do this in my name, forgetting that my words make
*perfect* sense because they come from God. They are as sensible now as
they ever were, because they speak of ideas which are eternal.
Forgiveness that is learned of me does *not* use fear to *undo* fear.
Nor does it make real the *unreal* and then destroy it.

<sup>14</sup> Forgiveness through the Holy Spirit lies simply in looking beyond
error from the beginning and thus *keeping* it unreal for you. Do not
let any belief in its realness enter your minds *at all*, or you will
also believe that *you* must undo what you have made in order to be
forgiven. What has no effect does not exist, and to the Holy Spirit, the
effects of error are *totally* non-existent. By steadily and
consistently canceling out *all* its effects *everywhere* and in *all*
respects, He teaches that the ego does not exist and *proves* it. Follow
His teaching in forgiveness then, because forgiveness *is* His function,
and He knows how to fulfill it perfectly. That is what we meant when we
once said that miracles are *natural*, and when they do *not* occur,
something has gone wrong.

<sup>15</sup> Miracles are merely the sign of your willingness to follow the Holy
Spirit's plan of salvation in recognition of the fact that you do *not*
know what it is. His work is *not* your function, and unless you accept
this, you cannot learn what *your* function is. The confusion of
functions is so typical of the ego that you should be quite familiar
with it by now. The ego believes that *all* functions belong to it, even
though it has no idea what they *are*. This is more than mere confusion.
It is a particularly dangerous combination of grandiosity *and*
confusion which makes it likely that the ego will attack anyone and
anything for no reason at all. This is exactly what the ego *does*. It
is *totally* unpredictable in its responses, because it has no idea of
*what* it perceives.

<sup>16</sup> If one has no idea of what is happening, how appropriately can you
*expect* him to react? You might still ask yourself, regardless of how
you can *account* for the reactions, whether they place the ego in a
very sound position as the guide for *yours*. It seems absurd to have to
emphasize repeatedly that the ego's qualifications as a guide are
singularly unfortunate and that it is a remarkably poor choice as a
teacher of salvation. Yet this question, ridiculous as it seems, is
really the crucial issue in the whole separation fantasy. Anyone who
elects a totally insane guide *must* be totally insane himself.

<sup>17</sup> It is not true that you do not know the guide is insane. *You* know
it because *I* know it, and you *have* judged it by the same standard as
I have. The ego literally lives on borrowed time, and its days are
numbered. Do not fear the Last Judgment, but welcome it and do not wait,
for the ego's time is borrowed from *your* eternity. This *is* the
Second Coming, which was made *for* you as the First was created. The
Second Coming is merely the return of *sense*. Can this *possibly* be
fearful?

<sup>18</sup> What can be fearful but fantasy, and no one turns to fantasy unless
he despairs of finding satisfaction in reality. Yet it is certain that
he will *never* find satisfaction in fantasy, so that his only hope is
to *change his mind about reality*. Only if the decision that reality is
fearful is *wrong* can God be right. And I assure you that God *is*
right. Be glad, then, that you *have* been wrong, but this was only
because you did not know who you were. Had you remembered, you could no
more have been wrong than God can. The impossible can happen *only* in
fantasy. When you search for reality in fantasies, you will not find it.
The symbols of fantasy are of the ego, and of *these* you will find
many. But do not look for meaning in them. They have no more meaning
than the fantasies into which they are woven.

<sup>19</sup> Fairy tales can be pleasant or fearful, pretty or ugly, but no one
calls them *true*. Children may believe them, and so for a while the
tales *are* true for them. Yet when reality dawns, the fantasies are
gone. *Reality* has not gone in the meanwhile. The Second Coming is the
*awareness* of reality, not its *return*. Behold, my children, reality
is here. It belongs to you and me and God and is perfectly satisfying to
all of us. *Only* this awareness heals, because it is the awareness of
truth.

