---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: Salvation and God’s Will
ref: Tx.9.VI
---

<sup>38</sup> God's Will is your salvation. Would He not have given you the means
to find it? If He wills you to *have* it, He must have made it possible
and very easy to obtain it. Your brothers are everywhere. You do not
have to seek far for salvation. Every minute and every second gives you
a chance to save *yourself*. Do not lose these chances, not because they
will not return, but because delay of joy is needless. God wills you
perfect happiness *now*. Is it possible that this is not also *your*
will? And is it possible that this is not *also* the will of your
brothers?

<sup>39</sup> Consider, then, that in this joint will you *are* all united, and in
this *only*. There will be disagreement on anything else, but *not* on
this. This, then, is where peace *abides*. And *you* abide in peace when
you so decide. Yet you cannot abide in peace unless you accept the
Atonement, because the Atonement *is* the way to peace. The reason is
very simple and so obvious that it is often overlooked. That is because
the ego is *afraid* of the obvious since obviousness is the essential
characteristic of reality. Yet *you* cannot overlook it unless you are
*not looking.*

<sup>40</sup> It is *perfectly* obvious that if the Holy Spirit looks with love on
*all* He perceives, He looks with love on *you*. His evaluation of you
is based on His knowledge of what you are, and so He evaluates you
truly. And this evaluation *must* be in your mind because *He* is. The
ego is also in your mind, because you have *accepted* it there. *Its*
evaluation of you, however, is the exact opposite of the Holy Spirit's,
because the ego does *not* love you. It is unaware of what you are and
wholly mistrustful of *everything* it perceives, because its own
perceptions are so shifting. The ego is therefore capable of
suspiciousness at best and viciousness at worst. That is its range. It
cannot exceed it because of its uncertainty. And it can never go
*beyond* it, because it can never *be* certain.

<sup>41</sup> You, then, have two *conflicting* evaluations of yourself in your
minds, and they *cannot* both be true. You do not yet realize how
*completely* different these evaluations are, because you do not
understand how lofty the Holy Spirit's perception of you really is. He
is not deceived by anything you do, because He never forgets what you
*are*. The ego is deceived by everything you do, even when you respond
to the Holy Spirit, because at such times its confusion *increases*. The
ego is, therefore, particularly likely to attack you when you react
lovingly, because it has evaluated you as *unloving*, and you are going
*against* its judgment.

<sup>42</sup> The ego will begin to *attack* your motives as soon as they become
clearly out of accord with its perception of you. This is when it will
shift abruptly from suspiciousness to viciousness, since its uncertainty
is increased. Yet it is surely pointless to attack in return. What can
this mean except that you are *agreeing* with the ego's evaluation of
what you are? If you are willing to see yourself as unloving, you will
*not* be happy. You are condemning yourself and *must* therefore regard
yourself as inadequate. Would you look to the ego to help you escape
from a sense of inadequacy it has *produced* and must *maintain* for its
existence? Can you *escape* from its evaluation of you by using its
methods for keeping this picture *intact*?

<sup>43</sup> You cannot evaluate an insane belief system from *within* it. Its own
range precludes this. You can only go *beyond* it, look back from a
point where *sanity* exists, *and* *see the contrast*. Only *by* this
contrast can insanity be judged as insane. With the grandeur of God in
you, you have chosen to be little and to lament your littleness.
*Within* the system which dictated this choice, the lament *is*
inevitable. Your littleness is taken for granted there, and you do *not*
ask, “Who granted it?” The question is meaningless within the ego's
thought system, because it opens the *whole* thought system to question.

<sup>44</sup> We said before that the ego does not know what a real question is.
Lack of knowledge of any kind is always associated with *unwillingness*
to know and produces a total lack of knowledge simply because knowledge
*is* total. *Not* to question your littleness, therefore, is to deny
*all* knowledge and keep the ego's *whole* thought system intact. You
cannot retain *part* of a thought system, because it can be questioned
*only* at its foundation. And this must be questioned from beyond it,
because, *within* it, its foundation *does* stand. The Holy Spirit
judges against the reality of the ego's thought system merely because He
knows its *foundation* is not true. Therefore, nothing that arises from
it means anything. The Holy Spirit judges every belief you hold in terms
of where it comes from. If it comes from God, He knows it to be true. If
it does not, He knows that it is meaningless.

<sup>45</sup> Whenever you question your value, say:

<sup>46</sup> *God Himself is incomplete without me*.

<sup>47</sup> Remember this when the ego speaks, and you will not hear it. The
truth about you is so lofty that nothing unworthy of God is worthy of
you. Choose, then, what you want in these terms and accept nothing that
you would not offer to God as wholly fitting for Him, for you do not
*want* anything else. Return your part of Him, and He will give you all
of Himself in exchange for your return of what belongs to Him and
renders Him complete.

