---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: Magic versus Miracles
ref: Tx.9.X
---

<sup>85</sup> *All* magic is a form of reconciling the irreconcilable. All religion
is the recognition that the irreconcilable cannot *be* reconciled.
Sickness and perfection *are* irreconcilable. If God created you
perfect, you *are* perfect. If you believe you can be sick, you have
placed other gods before Him. God is not at war with the god of sickness
you made, but *you* are. He is the symbol of willing *against* God, and
you are afraid of him, *because* he cannot be reconciled with God's
Will. If you attack him, you will make him real to you. But if you
refuse to worship him in whatever form he may appear to you and wherever
you think you see him, he will disappear into the nothingness out of
which he was made.

<sup>86</sup> Reality can dawn only on an unclouded mind. It is always there to be
accepted, but its acceptance depends on your willingness to *have* it.
To know reality must involve the willingness to judge *unreality* for
what it is. This is the *right* use of selective perception. To overlook
nothingness is merely to judge it correctly, and because of your ability
to evaluate it truly, *to let it go*. Knowledge cannot dawn on a mind
full of illusions because truth and illusions are irreconcilable. Truth
is whole and *cannot* be known by part of a mind.

<sup>87</sup> The Sonship cannot be perceived as *partly* sick, because to perceive
it that way is not to perceive it at all. If the Sonship is one, it is
one in *all* respects. Oneness *cannot* be divided. If you perceive
other gods, your mind is split, and you will not be able to *limit* the
split because the split *is* the sign that you have removed part of your
mind from God's Will, and this means it is out of control. To be out of
control is to be out of *reason*, and the mind *does* become
unreasonable without reason. This is merely a matter of definition. By
*defining* the mind wrongly, you perceive it as *functioning* wrongly.

<sup>88</sup> God's laws will keep your minds at peace, because peace is His Will,
and His laws are established to uphold it. His are the laws of freedom,
but yours are the laws of bondage. Since freedom and bondage are
irreconcilable, their laws cannot *be* understood together. The laws of
God work only for your good, and there *are* no other laws beside His.
Everything else is merely lawless and therefore chaotic. Yet God Himself
has protected everything He created *by* His laws. Therefore, everything
that is not under them does not exist. “Laws of chaos” are meaningless
by definition. Creation is perfectly lawful, and the chaotic is without
meaning because it is without *God*. You have given your peace to the
gods you made, but they are not there to take it from you, and you are
not able to give it to them.

<sup>89</sup> You are *not* free to give up freedom, but only to *deny* it. You
*cannot* do what God did not intend, because what He did not intend
*does not happen.* Your gods do not *bring* chaos; you are *endowing*
them with chaos and accepting it of them. All this has never been.
Nothing but the laws of God has ever operated, and nothing except His
Will will ever be. You were created through His laws and by His Will,
and the manner of your creation established you *as* creators. What you
have made is so unworthy of you that you could hardly want it if you
were willing to see it *as it is*. You will see nothing at all. And your
vision will automatically look beyond it to what is in you and all
around you. Reality cannot break through the obstructions you interpose,
but it *will* envelop you completely when you let them go.

<sup>90</sup> When you have experienced the protection of God, the making of idols
becomes inconceivable. There are no strange images in the Mind of God,
and what is not in His Mind cannot be in yours because you are of *One*
Mind and that Mind belongs to *Him*. It is yours, *because* it belongs
to Him, for ownership is sharing to Him. And if it is so for Him, it is
so for you. His definitions *are* His laws, for by them He established
the universe as what it is. No false gods you attempt to interpose
between yourself and your reality affect truth at all. Peace is yours
because God created you. And He created nothing else.

<sup>91</sup> The miracle is the act of a Son of God who has laid aside all false
gods and who calls on his brothers to do likewise. It is an act of
faith, because it is the recognition that his brother can do it. It is a
call to the Holy Spirit in his mind, a call to Him which is strengthened
by this joining. Because the miracle worker has heard Him, he
strengthens His Voice in a sick brother by weakening his *belief* in
sickness, which he does *not* share. The power of one mind *can* shine
into another, because all the lamps of God were lit by the same spark.
It is everywhere, and it is eternal.

<sup>92</sup> In many only the spark remains, for the Great Rays are obscured. Yet
God has kept the spark alive so that the rays can never be completely
forgotten. If you but see the little spark, you will learn of the
greater light, for the rays are there unseen. Perceiving the spark will
heal, but knowing the light will create. Yet in the returning, the
little light must be acknowledged first, for the separation was a
descent from magnitude to littleness. But the spark is still as pure as
the great light, because it is the remaining call of creation. Put all
your faith in it, and God Himself will answer you.

