---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: The Unhealed Healer
ref: Tx.9.IV
---

<sup>20</sup> The ego's plan for forgiveness is far more widely used than God's.
This is because it is undertaken by unhealed healers and is therefore of
the ego. Let us consider the unhealed healer more carefully now. By
definition, he is trying to *give* what he has not *received.* If he is
a theologian, he may begin with the premise, “I am a miserable sinner
and so are you.” If he is a psychotherapist, he is more likely to start
with the equally incredible idea that *he* really believes in attack and
so does the patient, but it does not matter in either case.

<sup>21</sup> We have repeatedly stated that beliefs of the ego cannot be shared,
and this is *why* they are unreal. How, then, can “uncovering” them
*make* them real? Every healer who searches fantasies for truth *must*
be unhealed, because he does not *know* where to look for truth and
therefore does not have the answer to the problem of healing. There is
an advantage to bringing nightmares into awareness, but *only* to teach
that they are not real and that *anything* they contain is meaningless.
The unhealed healer cannot do this, because he does not *believe* it.

<sup>22</sup> All unhealed healers follow the ego's plan for forgiveness in one
form or another. If they are theologians, they are likely to condemn
themselves, teach condemnation, and advocate a very fearful solution.
Projecting condemnation onto God, they make Him appear retaliative and
fear His retribution. What they have done is merely to *identify* with
the ego and, by perceiving clearly what *it* does, condemn themselves
because of this profound confusion. It is understandable that there has
been a revolt against this concept, but to revolt *against* it is still
to *believe* in it. The *form* of the revolt, then, is different but
*not* the content.

<sup>23</sup> The newer forms of the ego's plan are as unhelpful as the older ones,
because form does not matter to the Holy Spirit and therefore does not
matter at all. According to the newer forms of the ego's plan, the
therapist interprets the ego's symbols in the nightmare and then uses
them to prove that the *nightmare* is real. Having *made* it real, he
then attempts to dispel its effects by depreciating the importance *of
the dreamer*. This *would* be a healing approach if the dreamer were
properly identified as unreal. Yet if the dreamer is equated with the
*mind*, the mind's corrective power through the Holy Spirit is *denied*.

<sup>24</sup> It is noteworthy that this is a contradiction even in the ego's
terms, and one which it usually *does* note, even in its confusion. If
the way to counteract fear is to *reduce* the importance of the fearer,
how can this build ego *strength*? These perfectly self-evident
inconsistencies account for why, except in certain stylized verbal
accounts, no one can *explain* what happens in psychotherapy. Nothing
real *does*. Nothing real has happened to the unhealed healer, and he
learns from his own teaching.

<sup>25</sup> *Because* his ego is involved, it always attempts to gain some
support from the situation. Seeking to get something for *himself*, the
unhealed healer does not know how to *give* and consequently cannot
share. He cannot correct because he is not working *correctively*. He
believes that it is up to him to teach the patient what is *real*, but
he does not know it himself. What, then, *should* happen? When God said,
“Let there be light,” there *was* light. Can you find light by analyzing
darkness as the psychotherapist does or like the theologian, by
acknowledging darkness in yourself and looking for a distant light to
remove it while *emphasizing* the distance?

<sup>26</sup> Healing is *not* mysterious. Nothing will occur unless you understand
it, since light *is* understanding. A “miserable sinner” cannot be
healed without magic, nor can an “unimportant mind” esteem itself
without magic. Both forms of the ego's approach, then, must arrive at an
impasse, the characteristic “impossible situation” to which the ego
*always* leads. It *can* be helpful to point out to a patient where he
is heading, but the point is lost unless he can change his direction.
The therapist cannot do this for him, but he also cannot do this for
*himself*.

<sup>27</sup> The *only* meaningful contribution the therapist can make is to
present an example of one whose direction has been changed *for* him and
who no longer believes in nightmares of *any* kind. The light in *his*
mind will therefore *answer* the questioner, who must decide with God
that there *is* light because he *sees* it. And by *his* acknowledgment,
the *therapist* knows it is there. That is how perception ultimately is
translated into knowledge. The miracle worker begins by *perceiving*
light and translates *his* perception into sureness by continually
extending it and accepting its acknowledgment. Its *effects* assure him
it is there.

<sup>28</sup> The therapist does not heal; *he lets healing be*. He can point to
darkness, but he cannot bring light of *himself*, for light is not of
him. Yet, being *for* him, it must also be for his patient. The Holy
Spirit is the *only* therapist. He makes healing perfectly clear in
*any* situation in which he is the Guide. The human therapist can only
let Him *fulfill* His function. He needs no help for this. He will tell
you *exactly* what to do to help *anyone* He sends to you for help and
will speak to him through you if you do not *interfere.* Remember that
you *are* choosing a guide for helping, and the *wrong* choice will
*not* help. But remember also that the *right* one *will.* Trust Him,
for help is His function, and He is of God.

<sup>29</sup> As you awaken other minds to the Holy Spirit through Him and *not*
yourself, you will understand that you are not obeying the laws of this
world, but that the laws you are obeying *work*. “The good is what
works” is a sound, though insufficient, statement. *Only* the good *can*
work. Nothing else works at all. This course is a guide to behavior.
Being a very direct and very simple learning situation, it provides the
Guide who *tells* you what to do. If you do it, you will *see* that it
works. Its *results* are more convincing than its words. They will
convince you that the words are true. By following the right Guide you
will learn the simplest of all lessons—

<sup>30</sup> *By their fruits ye shall know them, and **they** shall know
**themselves**.*

