---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.9.I
---

The alertness of the ego to the errors which other egos make is not the
kind of vigilance the Holy Spirit would have you maintain. Egos are
critical in terms of the kind of “sense” they stand for. *They*
understand this kind of sense because it *is* sensible to them. To the
Holy Spirit, it makes no sense at all. To the ego, it is kind and right
and good to point out errors and “correct” them. This makes perfect
sense to the ego, which is totally unaware of what errors *are* and what
correction *is*.

<sup>2</sup> Errors *are* of the ego, and correction of errors of any kind lies
solely in the *relinquishment* of the ego. When you correct a brother,
you are telling him that he is wrong. He may be making no sense at the
time, and it is certain that if he is speaking from the ego, he *will*
be making no sense. But your task is still to tell him he is *right*.
You do not tell him this verbally if he is speaking foolishly because he
needs correction at *another* level, since his error *is* at another
level. *He* is still right, because he is a Son of God. His ego is
always wrong, no matter *what* it says or does.

<sup>3</sup> If you point out the errors of your brother's ego, you must be seeing
through *yours*, because the Holy Spirit does not perceive his errors.
This must be true if there is no communication at all between the ego
and the Holy Spirit. The ego makes no sense, and the Holy Spirit does
not attempt to understand anything that arises from it. Since He does
not understand it, He does not *judge* it, knowing that nothing it
engenders means anything.

