---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: Grandeur versus Grandiosity
ref: Tx.9.VII
---

<sup>48</sup> Grandeur is of God and *only* of Him. Therefore, it is in you.
Whenever you become aware of it, however dimly, you abandon the ego
automatically, because in the presence of the grandeur of God the
meaninglessness of the ego becomes perfectly apparent. Though it does
not understand this, the ego believes that its “enemy” has struck and
attempts to offer gifts to induce you to return to its “protection.”
*Self*\-inflation \[is the only offering it can make. The grandiosity\]
of the ego is its alternative to the grandeur of God. Which will you
choose?

<sup>49</sup> Grandiosity is *always* a cover for despair. It is without hope
because it is not real. It is an attempt to counteract your littleness,
based on the belief that the littleness is *real*. Without this belief,
grandiosity is meaningless, and you could not possibly want it. The
essence of grandiosity is competitiveness, because it *always* involves
attack. It is a delusional attempt to *outdo* but *not* to undo. We said
before that the ego vacillates between suspiciousness and viciousness.
It remains suspicious as long as you despair of yourself. It shifts to
viciousness whenever you will not tolerate self-abasement and seek
relief. Then it offers you the illusion of attack as a solution.

<sup>50</sup> The ego does not know the difference between grandeur and
grandiosity, because it does not know the difference between miracle
impulses and ego-alien beliefs of its own. We once said that the ego
*is* aware of threat, but does not make distinctions between two
entirely different kinds of threat to its existence. Its own profound
sense of vulnerability renders it incapable of judgment *except* in
terms of attack. When it experiences threat, its only decision is
whether to attack *now* or to withdraw to attack later. If you accept
its offer of grandiosity, it will attack immediately. If you do not, it
will wait.

<sup>51</sup> The ego is immobilized in the presence of God's grandeur, because
*His* grandeur establishes *your* freedom. Even the faintest hint of
your reality literally drives the ego from your mind because of complete
lack of investment in it. Grandeur is totally *without* illusions, and
because it is real, it is compellingly convincing. Yet the conviction of
reality will not remain with you unless you do not allow the ego to
attack it. The ego will make every effort to recover and mobilize its
energies *against* your release. It will tell you that you are insane
and argue that grandeur *cannot* be a real part of you because of the
littleness in which *it* believes.

<sup>52</sup> Yet your grandeur is not delusional, *because* you did not make it.
*You* have made grandiosity and are afraid of it because it is a form of
attack, but your grandeur is of God, Who created it out of His Love.
From your grandeur you can only bless, because your grandeur is your
*abundance*. By blessing, you hold it in your mind, protecting it from
illusions and keeping yourself in the Mind of God. Remember always that
you cannot be anywhere *except* in the Mind of God. When you forget
this, you *will* despair, and you *will* attack.

<sup>53</sup> The ego depends *solely* on your willingness to tolerate it. If you
are willing to look upon your grandeur, you *cannot* despair, and
therefore you cannot *want* the ego. Your grandeur is God's *answer* to
the ego because it is true. Littleness and grandeur cannot co-exist, nor
is it possible for them to alternate in your awareness. Littleness and
grandiosity can and *must* alternate in your awareness since both are
untrue and are therefore on the same level. Being the level of shift, it
is experienced as shifting, and extremes are its essential
characteristic.

<sup>54</sup> Truth and littleness are *denials* of each other, because grandeur
*is* truth. Truth does not vacillate; it is *always* true. When grandeur
slips away from you, you have replaced it with something *you* have
made. Perhaps it is the belief in littleness; perhaps it is the belief
in grandiosity. Yet it *must* be insane because it is *not* true. Your
grandeur will *never* deceive you, but your illusions *always* will.
Illusions *are* deceptions. You cannot triumph, but you *are* exalted.
And in your exalted state, you seek others like you and rejoice with
them.

<sup>55</sup> It is easy to distinguish grandeur from grandiosity because love is
returned, but pride is not. Pride will not produce miracles and
therefore will deprive you of your true witnesses to your reality. Truth
is not obscure nor hidden, but its obviousness to *you* lies in the joy
you bring to its witnesses, who *show* it to you. They attest to your
grandeur, but they cannot attest to pride, because pride is not shared.
God *wants* you to behold what He created, because it is His joy.

<sup>56</sup> Can your grandeur be arrogant when God Himself witnesses to it? And
what can be real that *has* no witnesses? What good can come of it? And
if no good can come of it, the Holy Spirit cannot use it. What He cannot
transform to the Will of God does not exist at all. Grandiosity is
delusional, because it is used to *replace* your grandeur. Yet what God
has created cannot *be* replaced. God is incomplete without you, because
His grandeur is total, and you cannot *be* missing from it.

<sup>57</sup> You are altogether irreplaceable in the Mind of God. No one else can
fill your part of it, and while you leave your part of it empty, your
eternal place merely waits for your return. God, through His Voice,
reminds you of it, and God Himself keeps your extensions safe within it.
Yet you do not know them until you return to them. You *cannot* replace
the Kingdom, and you cannot replace *yourself.* God, Who *knows* your
value, would not have it so, and so it is *not* so. Your value is in
*God's* Mind and therefore not in yours alone. To accept yourself as God
created you cannot be arrogance, because it is the *denial* of
arrogance. To accept your littleness *is* arrogant, because it means
that you believe *your* evaluation of yourself is *truer* than God's.

<sup>58</sup> Yet if truth is indivisible, your evaluation of yourself must *be*
God's. You did not establish your value, and it *needs* no defense.
Nothing can attack it or prevail over it. It does not vary. It merely
*is*. Ask the Holy Spirit *what* it is and He will tell you, but do not
be afraid of His answer, for it comes from God. It *is* an exalted
answer because of its Source, but the Source is true and so is Its
answer. Listen and do not question what you hear, for God does not
deceive. He would have you replace the ego's belief in littleness with
His own exalted answer to the question of your being, so that you can
cease to question it and *know* it for what it *is*.

