---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: Sanity and Perception
ref: Tx.9.II
---

<sup>4</sup> When you react *at all* to errors, you are not listening to the Holy
Spirit. He has merely disregarded them, and if you attend to them, you
are not hearing *Him*. If you do not hear Him, you *are* listening to
your ego and making as little sense as the brother whose errors you
perceive. This cannot be correction. Yet it is more than merely lack of
correction for him. It is the giving up of correction in *yourself*.

<sup>5</sup> When a brother behaves insanely, you can heal him only by perceiving
the *sanity* in him. If you perceive his errors and *accept* them, you
are accepting *yours*. If you want to give yours over to the Holy
Spirit, you must do this with his. Unless this becomes the one way in
which you handle *all* errors, you cannot understand how all errors are
*undone.* How is this different from telling you that what you teach you
learn? Your brother is as right as you are, and if you think he is
wrong, you are condemning yourself.

<sup>6</sup> *You* cannot correct *yourself.* Is it possible, then, for you to
correct another? Yet you *can* see him truly because it is possible for
you to see *yourself* truly. It is not up to you to change him but
merely to accept him as he *is.* His errors do not come from the truth
that is in him, and only this truth is yours. His errors cannot change
this and can have no effect at all on the truth in *you*. To perceive
errors in anyone and to react to them as if they were real is to *make*
them real to you. You will not escape paying the price for this, not
because you are being punished for it, but because you are following the
wrong guide and will lose your way.

<sup>7</sup> Your brother's errors are not of him any more than yours are of *you*.
Accept his errors as real, and you have attacked *yourself.* If you
would find your way and keep it, see only truth beside you, for you walk
together. The Holy Spirit in you forgives all things in you *and* in
your brother. *His* errors are forgiven *with* yours. Atonement is no
more separate than love. Atonement cannot be separate, because it
*comes* from love. *Any* attempt you make to correct a brother means
that you believe correction by *you* is possible, and this can *only* be
the arrogance of the ego. Correction is of God, Who does not know of
arrogance. The Holy Spirit forgives everything, *because* God created
everything.

<sup>8</sup> Do not undertake *His* function, or you will forget *yours*. Accept
*only* the function of healing in time, because that is what time is
*for*. God *gave* you the function to create in eternity. You do not
need to learn this, but you *do* need to learn to *want* this, and for
this all learning was made. This is the Holy Spirit's good use of an
ability which you do not *need*, but which you *have* made. Give it to
Him! You do not know how to use it. He will teach you how to see
yourself without condemnation by learning how to look on *everything*
without it. Condemnation will then not be real to you, and all your
errors *will* be forgiven.

