---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: The Inclusiveness of Creation
ref: Tx.9.VIII
---

<sup>59</sup> Nothing beyond yourself can make you fearful or loving, because
nothing *is* beyond you. Time and eternity are both in your mind and
*will* conflict until you perceive time solely as a means to *regain*
eternity. You cannot do this as long as you believe that *anything*
which happens to you is caused by factors *outside* yourself. You must
learn that time is solely at *your* disposal, and that nothing in the
world can take this responsibility from you. You can *violate* God's
laws in your imagination, but you cannot *escape* from them. They were
established for your protection and are as inviolate as your safety.

<sup>60</sup> God created nothing beside you, and nothing beside you exists, for
you are part of Him. What except Him *can* exist? Nothing *beyond* Him
can happen, because nothing *except* Him is real. Your creations add to
Him as *you* do, but nothing is added that is different, because
everything has always *been.* What can upset you except the ephemeral,
and how can the ephemeral be real if you are God's *only* creation, and
He created you eternal? Your holy will establishes *everything* that
happens to you. *Every* response you make to *everything* you perceive
is up to you, because your will determines your perception of it.

<sup>61</sup> God does not change His Mind about *you*, for He is not uncertain of
*Himself*. And what He knows *can* be known because He does not know
only for Himself. He created you for Himself, but He gave you the power
to create for *your* self so you could be like Him. That is *why* your
will is holy. Can anything exceed the love of God? Can anything, then,
exceed *your* will? Nothing can reach you from beyond it because, being
in God, *you* encompass everything. Believe this, and you *will* realize
how much is up to you. When anything threatens your peace of mind, ask
yourself,

<sup>62</sup> *Has God changed His Mind about me?*

<sup>63</sup> Then *accept* His decision, for it is indeed changeless, and refuse
to change your mind about *yourself*. God will never decide *against*
you, or He would be deciding against Himself.

<sup>64</sup> The reason you do not know *your* creations is simply that you would
decide against them as long as your minds are split, and to attack what
you have created is impossible. But remember that it is *as impossible
for God*. The law of creation is that you love your creations as
yourself because they *are* part of you. Everything that was created is
therefore perfectly safe, because the laws of God protect it by His
Love. Any part of your mind that does not know this has banished itself
from knowledge because it has not met its conditions.

<sup>65</sup> Who could have done this but you? Recognize this gladly, for in this
recognition lies the realization that your banishment is *not* of God
and therefore does not exist. You are at home in God, dreaming of exile
but perfectly capable of awakening to reality. Is it your will to do so?
You know from your own experience that what you see in dreams you think
is real as long as you are asleep. Yet the instant you waken, you *know*
that everything that *seemed* to happen did not happen at all. You do
not think this mysterious, even though all the laws of what you awakened
*to* were violated while you slept. Is it not possible that you merely
shifted from one dream to another, without *really* wakening?

<sup>66</sup> Would you bother to reconcile what happened in conflicting dreams, or
would you dismiss both together if you discovered that reality is in
accord with neither? You do not remember being awake. When you hear the
Holy Spirit, you merely feel better because loving seems *possible* to
you, but you do *not* remember yet that it once was so. And it is in
this remembering that you will know it can be so again. What is possible
has not yet been accomplished. Yet what has once been is so *now* if it
is eternal. When you remember, you will know what you remember *is*
eternal and therefore *is* now.

<sup>67</sup> You will remember everything the instant you *desire it wholly*, for
if to desire wholly is to create, you will have willed away the
separation, returning your mind simultaneously to your Creator and your
creations. Knowing *them*, you will have no wish to sleep but only the
will to waken and be glad. Dreams will be impossible, because you will
*want* only truth, and being at last your will, it will be yours.

