---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: The Awareness of the Holy Spirit
ref: Tx.9.V
---

<sup>31</sup> How can you become increasingly aware of the Holy Spirit in you
*except* by His effects? You cannot see Him with your eyes nor hear Him
with your ears. How, then, can you perceive Him at all? If you inspire
joy, and others react to you *with* joy even though you are not
experiencing joy yourself, there *must* be something in you that is
capable of producing it. If it is in you and *can* produce joy, and if
you see that it *does* produce joy in others, you *must* be dissociating
it in yourself.

<sup>32</sup> It seems to you that the Holy Spirit does *not* produce joy
consistently in you *only* because you do not consistently *arouse* joy
in others. Their reactions to you *are* your evaluations of His
consistency. When you are inconsistent, you will not always *give*
*rise* to joy and so you will not always *recognize* His consistency.
What you offer to your brother, you offer to Him because He cannot go
*beyond* your offering in His giving. This is not because *He* limits
His giving, but simply because you have limited your *receiving*. The
will to receive is the will to accept.

<sup>33</sup> If your brothers *are* part of you, will you *accept* them? Only they
can teach you what you are, and your learning is the result of what you
taught them. What you call upon in them, you call upon in *yourself*.
And as you call upon it in them, it becomes real to *you*. God has but
one Son, knowing them all *as* one. Only God Himself is more than they,
but they are not less than He is. Would you know what this means? If
what you do to my brother you do to me, and if you do everything for
yourself because we are *part* of you, everything *we* do belongs to you
as well. Every Soul God created *is* part of you and shares His glory
*with* you. His Glory belongs to Him, but it is equally *yours.* You
cannot, then, be *less* glorious than He is.

<sup>34</sup> God is more than you only because He *created* you, but not even this
would He keep from you. Therefore you *can* create as He did, and your
dissociation will *not* alter this. Neither God's light *nor yours* is
dimmed because you do not see. Because the Sonship *must* create as one,
you remember creation whenever you recognize *part* of creation. Each
part you remember adds to *your* wholeness, because each part *is*
whole. Wholeness is indivisible, but you cannot learn of your wholeness
until you see it *everywhere*. You can *know* yourself only as God knows
His Son, for knowledge is shared *with* God. When you awake in Him you
will know your magnitude by accepting His limitlessness as *yours*, but
meanwhile you will judge it as you judge your brothers’ and will accept
it as you accept *theirs*.

<sup>35</sup> You are not yet awake, but you can learn *how* to awaken. Very simply
the Holy Spirit teaches you to awaken others. As you see them waken, you
will learn what waking *means*, and because you have willed to wake
them, their gratitude and their appreciation of what you have given them
will teach *you* its value. *They* will become the witnesses to your
reality, as *you* were created witnesses to God's. Yet when the Sonship
comes together and *accepts* its oneness, it will be known by its
creations, who witness to its reality as the Son does to the Father.

<sup>36</sup> Miracles have no place in eternity because they are reparative. Yet
while you still need healing, your miracles are the only witnesses to
your reality which you can *recognize.* You cannot perform a miracle for
*yourself*, because miracles are a way of *giving* acceptance *and*
receiving it. In time, the giving comes first, though they are
simultaneous in eternity, where they cannot *be* separated. When you
have learned that they *are* the same, the need for time is over.

<sup>37</sup> Eternity is *one* time, its only dimension being “always.” This
cannot mean anything to you, however, until you remember God's open arms
and finally know His open mind. Like Him, *you* are “always,” in His
Mind and with a mind like His. In *your* open mind are *your* creations,
in perfect communication born of perfect understanding. Could you but
accept one of them, you would not want *anything* the world has to
offer. Everything else would be totally meaningless. God's meaning is
incomplete without you, and you are incomplete without your creations.
Accept your brother in this world and accept *nothing else*, for in him
you will find your creations, because he created them *with* you. You
will never know that you are co-creator with God until you learn that
your brother is a co-creator with *you*.

