---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: The Denial of God
ref: Tx.9.XI
---

<sup>93</sup> The rituals of the god of sickness are strange and very demanding.
Joy is never permitted, for depression is the sign of allegiance to him.
Depression means that you have foresworn God. Men are afraid of
blasphemy, but they do not know what it means. They do not realize that
to deny God is to deny their *own* identity, and in this sense the wages
of sin *is* death. The sense is very literal; denial of life perceives
its opposite, as *all* forms of denial replace what *is* with what is
*not.* No one can really do this, but that you can *think* you can and
believe you *have* is beyond dispute.

<sup>94</sup> Do not forget, however, that to deny God will inevitably result in
projection, and you will believe that others, *and not yourself*, have
done this to you. You will receive the message you give, because it is
the message you *want*. You may believe that you judge your brothers by
the messages they give *you*, but *you* have judged *them* by the
message you give to *them*. Do not attribute your denial of joy to them,
or you cannot see the spark in them that could bring joy to *you.* It is
the *denial* of the spark that brings depression, and whenever you see
your brothers *without* it, you *are* denying God.

<sup>95</sup> Allegiance to the denial of God is the ego's religion. The god of
sickness obviously demands the denial of health, because health is in
direct opposition to its own survival. But consider what this means to
*you. Unless* you are sick, you cannot keep the gods you made, for only
in sickness could you possibly *want* them. Blasphemy, then, is
*self*\-destructive, *not* God-destructive. It means that you are
willing *not* to know yourself *in* *order* to be sick. This is the
offering which your god demands because, having made him out of *your*
insanity, he is an insane idea. He has many forms, but although he may
seem like many different things he is but one idea—the denial of God.

<sup>96</sup> Sickness and death entered the Mind of God's Son *against* His Will.
The “attack on God” made His Son think he was fatherless, and out of his
depression, he made the god of depression. This was his alternative to
joy, because he would not accept the fact that, although he was a
creator, he had been created. Yet the Son *is* helpless without the
Father, Who alone is his help. We said before that of yourselves you can
do nothing, but you are not *of* yourselves. If you were, what you have
made would be true, and you could *never* escape.

<sup>97</sup> It is *because* you did not make yourselves that you need be troubled
by nothing. Your gods are nothing, because your Father did not create
them. You cannot make creators who are unlike your Creator any more than
He could have created a Son who was unlike Him. If creation is sharing,
it cannot create what is unlike itself. It can share only what it *is*.
Depression is isolation, and so it could not have *been* created.

<sup>98</sup> Son of God, you have not sinned, but you *have* been much mistaken.
Yet this can be corrected, and God will help you, *knowing* that you
could not sin against Him. You denied Him *because* you loved Him,
knowing that if you *recognized* your love for Him, you *could* not deny
Him. Your denial of Him therefore means that you love Him and that you
know *He* loves *you*. Remember that what you deny, you *must* have
known. And if you accept denial, you can accept its *undoing*.

<sup>99</sup> Your Father has not denied you. He does not retaliate, but He *does*
call to you to return. When you think He has not answered your call,
*you* have not answered *His*. He calls to you from every part of the
Sonship because of His love for His Son. If you *hear* His message, He
has answered you, and you will learn of Him if you hear aright. The love
of God is in everything He created, for His Son is everywhere. Look with
peace upon your brothers, and God will come rushing into your heart in
gratitude for your gift to Him.

<sup>100</sup> Do not look to the god of sickness for healing but only to the God
of love, for healing is the *acknowledgment* of Him. When you
acknowledge Him, you will *know* that He has never ceased to acknowledge
*you* and that in His acknowledgment of you lies your Being. You are not
sick, and you cannot die. But you *can* confuse yourself with things
that do. Remember, though, that to do this *is* blasphemy, for it means
that you are looking without love on God and His creation, from which He
cannot *be* separated. Only the eternal can be loved, for love does not
die. What is of God is His forever, and you *are* of God. Would He allow
Himself to suffer? And would He offer His Son anything that is not
acceptable to Him?

<sup>101</sup> If you will accept yourself as God created you, you will be
incapable of suffering. Yet to do this, you must acknowledge Him as your
Creator. This is not because you will be punished otherwise. It is
merely because your acknowledgment of your Father *is* the
acknowledgment of yourself as you are. Your Father created you wholly
without sin, wholly without pain, and wholly without suffering of any
kind. If you deny Him, you bring sin, pain, and suffering into your
*own* mind because of the power He gave it. Your mind is capable of
creating worlds, but it can also deny what it creates because it is
free.

<sup>102</sup> You do not realize how much you have denied yourself, and how much
God in His love would not have it so. Yet He would not interfere with
you, because He would not know His Son if he were not free. To interfere
with you would be to attack Himself, and God is not insane. When you
denied Him, *you* were insane. Would you have Him *share* your insanity?
God will never cease to love His Son, and His Son will never cease to
love Him. That was the condition of His Son's creation, fixed forever in
the Mind of God. To know that is sanity. To deny it is insanity. God
gave Himself to you in your creation, and His gifts are eternal. Would
you deny yourself to Him?

<sup>103</sup> Out of your gifts to Him, the Kingdom will be restored to His Son.
His Son removed himself *from* His gift by refusing to accept what had
been created for him and what he himself had created in the Name of his
Father. Heaven waits for his return, for it was created as the dwelling
place of God's Son. You are not at home anywhere else or in any other
condition. Do not deny yourself the joy which was created for you for
the misery you have made for yourselves. God has given you the means for
undoing what you have made. Listen, and you *will* learn what you are.

<sup>104</sup> If God knows His Children as wholly sinless, it is blasphemous to
perceive them as guilty. If God knows His Children as wholly without
pain, it is blasphemous to perceive suffering anywhere. If God knows His
Children to be wholly joyous, it is blasphemous to feel depressed. All
of these illusions and the many other forms which blasphemy may take are
*refusals* to accept creation as it is. If God created His Son perfect,
that is how you must learn to see him to learn of his reality. And as
*part* of the Sonship, that is how you must see *yourself* to learn of
*yours.*

<sup>105</sup> Do not perceive *anything* God did not create, or you are denying
*Him*. His is the *only* Fatherhood, and it is yours only because *He*
has given it to you. Your gifts to yourself are meaningless, but your
gifts to *your* creations are like His because they are given in His
Name. That is why your creations are as real as His. Yet the real
Fatherhood must be acknowledged if the real Son is to be known. You
believe that the sick things which you have made are your real
creations, because you believe that the sick images you perceive *are*
the Sons of God.

<sup>106</sup> Only if you accept the Fatherhood of God will you have *anything*,
because His fatherhood *gave* you everything. That is why to deny Him
*is* to deny yourself. Arrogance is the denial of love, because love
*shares* and arrogance *withholds*. As long as both appear to you to be
desirable, the concept of choice, which is *not* of God, will remain
with you. While this is not true in eternity, it *is* true in time, so
that while time lasts in *your* minds, there *will* be choices. Time
*itself* was your choice.

<sup>107</sup> If you would remember eternity, you must learn to look *only* on the
eternal. If you allow yourselves to become preoccupied with the
temporal, you *are* living in time. As always, your choice is determined
by what you value. Time and eternity cannot both be real, because they
contradict each other. If you will accept only what is timeless as real,
you will begin to understand eternity and make it yours.

