---
chapter: Nine
ctitle: The Correction of Error
title: The Decision to Forget
ref: Tx.9.IX
---

<sup>68</sup> Unless you *know* something, you *cannot* dissociate it. Knowledge
therefore *precedes* dissociation, and dissociation is nothing more than
a *decision to forget.* What has been forgotten then appears to be
fearful, but *only* because the dissociation was an *attack* on truth.
You are fearful *because* you have forgotten. And you have *replaced*
your knowledge by an awareness of dreams because you are *afraid* of
your dissociation, *not* of what you have dissociated. Even in this
world's therapy, when dissociated material is *accepted*, it ceases to
be fearful, for the laws of mind always hold.

<sup>69</sup> Yet to give up the dissociation of *reality* brings more than merely
lack of fear. In *this* decision lie joy and peace and the glory of
creation. Offer the Holy Spirit only your will to remember, for He
retains the knowledge of God and of yourself *for* you, waiting for your
acceptance. Give up gladly *everything* that would stand in the way of
your remembering, for God is in your memory, and His Voice will tell you
that you are part of Him when you are willing to remember Him and know
your own reality again. Let nothing in this world delay your remembering
of Him, for in this remembering is the knowledge of *yourself*.

<sup>70</sup> To remember is merely to restore to your mind *what is already
there*. You do not *make* what you remember; you merely accept again
what has been made but was rejected. The ability to accept truth in this
world is the perceptual counterpart of creating in the Kingdom. God will
do His part if you will do yours, and *His* return in exchange for yours
is the exchange of knowledge *for* perception. *Nothing* is beyond His
Will for you. But signify your will to remember Him and behold! He will
give you everything but for the asking.

<sup>71</sup> When you attack, you are denying *yourself.* You are specifically
teaching yourself that you are *not* what you are. Your denial of
reality precludes the *acceptance* of God's gift, because you have
accepted something *else* in its place. If you understand that the
misuse of defenses always constitutes an attack on truth and truth is
God, you will realize why this is *always* fearful. If you further
recognize that you are *part* of God, you will understand why it is that
you always attack yourself *first*.

<sup>72</sup> \[*All* attack is self-attack. It cannot *be* anything else. Arising
from your *own* decision *not* to be what you *are, it is an attack on
your identification*. Attack is thus the way in which your
identification is lost because, when you attack, you *must* have
forgotten what you are. And if your reality is God's, when *you* attack
you are not remembering *Him*. This is not because He is gone, but
because you are willing *actively not to remember Him*.\] [^1]

<sup>73</sup> If you realized the complete havoc this makes of your peace of mind,
you could not make such an insane decision. You make it only because you
still believe that it can *get* you something you *want.* It follows,
then, that you want something *other* than peace of mind, but you have
not considered what it must be. Yet the logical outcome of your decision
is perfectly clear if you will *look* at it. By deciding *against* your
reality, you have made yourself vigilant *against* God and His Kingdom.
And it is *this* vigilance that makes you afraid to remember Him.

<sup>74</sup> You have *not* attacked God, and you *do* love Him. Can you change
your reality? No one can will to destroy himself. When you think you are
attacking yourself, it is a sure sign that you hate what you *think* you
are. And this, and *only* this, can *be* attacked by you. What you
*think* you are can be hateful, and what this strange image makes you do
can be very destructive. Yet the destruction is no more real than the
image, although those who make idols *do* worship them. The idols are
nothing, but their worshipers are the Sons of God in sickness.

<sup>75</sup> God would have them released from their sickness and returned to His
Mind. He will not *limit* your power to help them, because He has
*given* it to you. Do not be afraid of it, because it is your salvation.
What Comforter can there be for the sick Children of God except His
power through *you*? Remember that it does not matter *where* in the
Sonship He is accepted. He is *always* accepted for all, and when *your*
mind receives Him, the remembrance of Him awakens throughout the
Sonship. Heal your brothers simply by accepting God *for* them.

<sup>76</sup> Your minds are not separate, and God has only one channel for
healing, because He has but one Son. His remaining communication link
with all His Children joins them together and them to Him. To be aware
of this is to heal them, because it is the awareness that no one is
separate, and so no one is sick. To believe that a Son of God *can* be
sick is to believe that part of God can suffer. Love *cannot* suffer,
because it cannot attack. The remembrance of love therefore brings
invulnerability with it.

<sup>77</sup> Do not side with sickness in the presence of a Son of God even if
*he* believes in it, for *your* acceptance of God in him *acknowledges*
the love of God which he has forgotten. Your recognition of him as
*part* of God teaches him the truth about himself, which he is denying.
Would you *strengthen* his denial of God and thus lose sight of
*yourself*? Or would you remind him of his wholeness and remember your
Creator *with* him? To believe a Son of God is sick is to worship the
same idol he does. God created love, *not* idolatry. All forms of
idolatry are caricatures of creation, taught by sick minds which are too
divided to know that creation *shares* power and *never* usurps it.
Sickness is idolatry, because it is the belief that power can be taken
*from* you. Yet this is impossible, because you are part of God, Who
*is* all power.

<sup>78</sup> A sick god *must* be an idol, made in the image of what its maker
thinks *he* is. And that is exactly what the ego *does* perceive in a
Son of God; a sick god, self-created, self-sufficient, very vicious, and
very vulnerable. Is *this* the idol you would worship? Is *this* the
image you would be vigilant to *save*? \[Are you *really* afraid of
losing *this*?\] Look calmly at the logical conclusion of the ego's
thought system and judge whether its offering is really what you want,
for this *is* what it offers you. To *obtain* this you are willing to
attack the divinity of your brothers and thus lose sight of *yours*. And
you are willing to keep it hidden and to protect this idol, which you
think will save you from the dangers which the idol itself *stands for*,
but which do not exist.

<sup>79</sup> There are no idolaters in the Kingdom, but there is great
appreciation for every Soul which God created because of the calm
knowledge that each one is part of Him. God's Son knows no idols, but he
*does* know his Father. Health in this world is the counterpart of value
in Heaven. It is not my merit that I contribute to you but my love, for
you do not value yourselves. When you do not value yourself, you become
sick, but *my* value of you can heal you because the value of God's Son
is one. When I said, “My peace I give unto you,” I meant it. Peace came
from God through me to *you*. It was for you, although you did not ask.

<sup>80</sup> When a brother is sick, it is because he is *not* asking for peace
and therefore does not know he *has* it. The *acceptance* of peace is
the denial of illusion, and sickness *is* an illusion. Yet every Son of
God has the power to deny illusions *anywhere* in the Kingdom merely by
denying them completely in himself. *I* can heal you because I *know*
you. I know your value *for* you, and it is this value that makes you
whole. A whole mind is not idolatrous and does not know of conflicting
laws. I will heal you merely because I have only *one* message, and it
is true. Your faith in it will make you whole when you have faith in me.

<sup>81</sup> I do not bring God's message with deception, and you will learn this
as you learn that you always receive as much as you *accept.* You could
accept peace *now* for everyone you meet and offer them perfect freedom
from *all* illusions because *you* heard. But have no other gods before
Him, or you will *not* hear. God is not jealous of the gods you make,
but *you* are. You would save them and serve them, because you believe
that they made *you*. You think they are your father because you are
projecting onto them the fearful fact that *you* made them to *replace*
God. Yet when they seem to speak to you, remember that nothing *can*
replace God, and whatever replacements you have attempted *are* nothing.

<sup>82</sup> Very simply, then, you may *believe* you are afraid of nothingness,
but you are really afraid of *nothing*. And in *that* awareness you are
healed. You *will* hear the god you listen to. You *made* the god of
sickness, and *by* making him, you made yourself able to hear him. Yet
you did not create him, because he is *not* the Will of the Father. He
is therefore not eternal and will be *unmade* for you the instant you
signify your willingness to accept *only* the eternal. If God has but
one Son, there is but one God. You share reality with Him, *because*
reality is not divided. To accept other gods before Him is to place
other images before *yourself*.

<sup>83</sup> You do not realize how much you listen to your gods and how vigilant
you are on their behalf. Yet they exist only *because* you honor them.
Place honor where it is due, and peace will be yours. It is your
inheritance from your *real* Father. You cannot make your father, and
the father you made did not make you. Honor is not due to illusions, for
to honor them is to honor nothing. Yet fear is not due them either, for
nothing cannot be fearful. You have chosen to fear love *because* of its
perfect harmlessness, and because of this fear, you have been willing to
give up your own perfect helpfulness and your own perfect Help.

<sup>84</sup> Only at the altar of God will you find peace. And this altar is in
you, because God put it there. His Voice still calls you to return, and
He will be heard when you place no other gods before Him. You can give
up the god of sickness for your brothers; in fact, you would *have* to
do so if you give him up for yourself. For if you see him anywhere, you
have accepted him. And if you accept him, you *will* bow down and
worship him because he was made as God's replacement. He is the belief
that you can *choose* which god is real. Although it is perfectly clear
that this has nothing to do with reality, it is equally clear that it
has *everything* to do with reality as you perceive it.

[^1]: Paragraph 9.72 does not appear in the *Original Edition* manuscript.  Previously numbered as paragraph 71a, the content was restored in the 2009 Printing from an earlier manuscript. Starting with the 2012 Printing, paragraphs 72 through the end of Chapter 9 have been renumbered. –*Ed*.

