---
chapter: Twenty One
ctitle: The Inner Picture
title: Reason and Correction
ref: Tx.21.VII
---

<sup>59</sup> Reason cannot see sin but *can* see errors and leads to their
correction. It does not value them, but their correction. Reason will
also tell you when you think you sin, you call for help. Yet if you will
not accept the help you call for, you will not believe that it is yours
to give. And so you will not give it, thus *maintaining* the belief. For
uncorrected error of any kind deceives you about the power that is in
you to *make* correction. If it can correct and you allow it not to do
so, you deny it to yourself and to your brother. And if he shares this
same belief, you both will think that you are damned. This you could
spare him and *yourself.* For reason would not make way for correction
in you alone.

<sup>60</sup> Correction cannot be accepted or refused by you *without* your
brother. Sin would maintain it can. Yet reason tells you that you cannot
see your brother or yourself as sinful and still perceive the other
innocent. Who looks upon himself as guilty and sees a sinless world? And
who can see a sinful world and look upon himself apart from it? Sin
would maintain you must be separate. But reason tells you that this must
be wrong. If you are joined, how could it be that you have private
thoughts? And how could thoughts that enter into what but seems like
yours alone have no effect at all on what *is* yours? If minds are
joined, this is impossible.

<sup>61</sup> No one can think but for himself, as God thinks not without His Son.
Only were both in bodies could this be. Nor could one mind think only
for itself unless the body *were* the mind. For only bodies can be
separate and therefore unreal. The home of madness cannot be the home of
reason. Yet it is easy to leave the home of madness if you see reason.
You do not leave insanity by going somewhere else. You leave it simply
by accepting reason where madness was. Madness and reason see the same
things, but it is certain that they look upon them differently.

<sup>62</sup> Madness is an attack on reason that drives it out of mind and takes
its place. Reason does not attack but takes the place of madness
quietly, replacing madness if it be the will of the insane to listen to
it. But the insane know not their will. For they believe they see the
body and let their madness tell them it is real. Reason would be
incapable of this. And if you would defend the body against your reason,
you will not understand the body or yourself.

<sup>63</sup> The body does not separate you from your brother, and if you think it
does, you are insane. But madness has a purpose and believes it also has
the means to make its purpose real. To see the body as a barrier between
what reason tells you *must* be joined must be insane. Nor could you see
it if you heard the voice of reason. What can there be that stands
between what is continuous? And if there is nothing in between, how can
what enters part be kept away from other parts? Reason would tell you
this. But think what you must recognize if it be so.

<sup>64</sup> If you choose sin instead of healing, you would condemn the Son of
God to what can never be corrected. You tell him by your choice that he
is damned—separate from you and from his Father forever and without a
hope of safe return. You teach him this, and you will learn of him
*exactly* what you taught. For you can teach him only that he is as you
would have him, and what you choose he be is but your choice for *you*.
Yet think not this is fearful. That you are joined to him is but a fact,
not an interpretation. How can a fact be fearful unless it disagrees
with what you hold more dear than truth? Reason will tell you that this
fact is your *release*. Neither your brother nor yourself can be
attacked alone. But neither can accept a miracle instead *without* the
other being blessed by it and healed of pain.

<sup>65</sup> Reason, like love, would reassure you and seeks not to frighten you.
The power to heal the Son of God is given you because he *must* be one
with you. You *are* responsible for how he sees himself. And reason
tells you it is given you to change his whole mind, which is one with
you, in just an instant. And any instant serves to bring complete
correction of his errors and make him whole. The instant that you choose
to let *yourself* be healed, in that same instant is his whole salvation
seen as complete with yours. Reason is given you to understand that this
is so. For reason, kind as is the purpose for which it is the means,
leads steadily away from madness toward the goal of truth. And here you
will lay down the burden of denying truth. *This* is the burden that is
terrible, and not the truth.

<sup>66</sup> That you are joined is your salvation—the gift of Heaven, not the
gift of fear. Does Heaven seem to be a burden to you? In madness, yes.
And yet what madness sees must be dispelled by reason. Reason assures
you Heaven is what you *want*, and *all* you want. Listen to Him Who
speaks with reason and brings your reason into line with His. Be willing
to let reason be the means by which He would direct you how to leave
insanity behind. Hide not behind insanity in order to escape from
reason. What madness would conceal, the Holy Spirit still holds out for
everyone to look upon with gladness.

<sup>67</sup> You *are* your brother's savior. He is *yours.* Reason speaks happily
indeed of this. This gracious plan was given love by Love. And what Love
plans is like Itself in this: being united, It would have you learn what
*you* must be. And being one with It, it must be given you to give what
It has given and gives still. Spend but an instant in the glad
acceptance of what is given you to give your brother, and learn with him
what has been given *both* of you. To give is no more blessed than to
receive. But neither is it less.

<sup>68</sup> The Son of God is *always* blessed as one. And as his gratitude goes
out to you who blessed him, reason will tell you that it cannot be you
stand apart from blessing. The gratitude he offers you reminds you of
the thanks your Father gives you for completing Him. And here alone does
reason tell you that you can understand what you must be. Your Father is
as close to you as is your brother. Yet what is there that could be
nearer you than is your Self?

<sup>69</sup> The power that you have over the Son of God is not a threat to his
reality. It but *attests* to it. Where could his freedom lie but in
himself if he be free already? And who could bind him but himself if he
deny his freedom? God is not mocked; no more His Son can be imprisoned
save by his own desire. And it is by his own desire that he is freed.
Such is his strength and not his weakness. He *is* at his own mercy. And
where he chooses to be merciful, there is he free. But where he chooses
to condemn instead, there is he held a prisoner, waiting in chains his
pardon on himself to set him free.

