---
chapter: Twenty One
ctitle: The Inner Picture
title: The Inner Shift
ref: Tx.21.IX
---

<sup>85</sup> Are thoughts then dangerous? To bodies, *yes*! The thoughts that seem
to kill are those which teach the thinker that he *can* be killed. And
so he dies *because* of what he learned. He goes from life to death, the
final proof he valued the inconstant more than constancy. Surely he
*thought* he wanted happiness. Yet he did not desire it *because* it was
the truth and therefore *must* be constant.

<sup>86</sup> The constancy of joy is a condition quite alien to your
understanding. Yet if you could even imagine what it must be, you would
desire it although you understand it not.

<sup>87</sup> The constancy of happiness has no exceptions—no change of any kind.
It is unshakable as is the love of God for His creation. Sure in its
vision as its Creator is in what He knows, it looks on everything and
sees it is the same. It sees not the ephemeral, for it desires that
everything be like itself and sees it so. Nothing has power to confound
its constancy because its own desire cannot be shaken. It comes as
surely unto those who see the final question is necessary to the rest,
as peace must come to those who choose to heal and not to judge.

<sup>88</sup> Reason will tell you that you *cannot* ask for happiness
inconstantly. For if what you desire you receive and happiness is
constant, then you need ask for it but *once* to have it *always*. And
if you do not have it always, being what it is, you did not ask for it.
For no one fails to ask for his desire of something he believes holds
out some promise of the power of giving it. He may be wrong in what he
asks, where, and of what. Yet he *will* ask because desire is a request,
an asking for, and made by one whom God Himself will never fail to
answer. God has already given him all that he *really* wants. Yet what
he is uncertain of, God *cannot* give. For he does not desire it while
he remains uncertain, and God's giving must be incomplete unless it is
received.

<sup>89</sup> You who complete God's Will and are His happiness, whose will is
powerful as His, a power that is not lost in your illusions, think
carefully why it should be you have not yet decided how you would answer
the final question. Your answer to the others has made it possible to
help you be but partially insane. And yet it is the final one that
really asks if you are willing to be *wholly* sane.

<sup>90</sup> What is the holy instant but God's appeal to you to recognize what He
has given you? Here is the great appeal to reason; the awareness of what
is always there to see, the happiness that could be always yours. Here
is the constant peace you could experience forever. Here is what denial
has denied *revealed* to you. For here the final question is *already*
answered and what you ask for given. Here is the future *now*, for time
is powerless because of your desire for what will never change. For you
have asked that nothing stand between the holiness of your relationship
and your *awareness* of its holiness.

