---
chapter: Twenty One
ctitle: The Inner Picture
title: Reason and Perception
ref: Tx.21.VI
---

<sup>49</sup> Perception selects and makes the world you see. It literally picks it
out as the mind directs. The laws of size and shape and brightness would
hold, perhaps, if other things were equal. They are *not* equal. For
what you look for, you are far more likely to discover than what you
would prefer to overlook. The still small Voice for God is not drowned
out by all the ego's raucous screams and senseless ravings to those who
*want* to hear it. Perception is a *choice* and not a fact. But on this
choice depends far more than you may realize as yet. For on the voice
you choose to hear and on the sights you choose to see, depends entirely
your whole belief in what you *are*. Perception is a witness but to this
and *never* to reality. Yet it can show you the conditions in which
awareness of reality is possible or those where it could never be.

<sup>50</sup> Reality needs no cooperation from you to be itself. But your
awareness of it needs your help because it is your choice. Listen to
what the ego says and see what it directs you see, and it is sure that
you will see yourself as tiny, vulnerable, and afraid. You will
experience depression, a sense of worthlessness, and feelings of
impermanence and unreality. You will believe that you are helpless prey
to forces far beyond your own control and far more powerful than you.
And you will think the world you made directs your destiny. For this
will be your *faith*. But never believe because it is your faith it
makes reality.

<sup>51</sup> There is another vision and another Voice in which your freedom lies
awaiting but your choice. And if you place your faith in them, you will
perceive another Self in you. This other Self sees miracles as natural.
They are as simple and natural to It as breathing to the body. They are
the obvious response to calls for help, the only one It makes. Miracles
seem unnatural to the ego because it does not understand how separate
minds can influence each other. Nor *could* they do so. But minds cannot
*be* separate. This other Self is perfectly aware of this. And thus It
recognizes that miracles do not affect another's mind, only Its own.
\[They always change *your* mind.\] There *is* no other.

<sup>52</sup> You do not realize the whole extent to which the idea of separation
has interfered with reason. Reason lies in the other Self you have cut
off from your awareness. And nothing you have allowed to stay in it is
capable of reason. How can the segment of the mind devoid of reason
understand what reason is or grasp the information it would give? All
sorts of questions may arise in it, but if the basic question stems from
reason, it will not ask it. Like all that stems from reason, the basic
question is obvious, simple, and remains unasked. But think not reason
could not answer it.

<sup>53</sup> God's plan for your salvation could not have been established without
your will and your consent. It must have been accepted by the Son of
God, for what God wills for him he *must* receive. For God wills not
apart from him, nor does the Will of God wait upon time to be
accomplished. Therefore, what joined the Will of God must be in you
*now*, being eternal. You must have set aside a place in which the Holy
Spirit can abide and where He *is*. He must have been there since the
need for Him arose and was fulfilled in the same instant. Such would
your reason tell you if you listened. Yet such is clearly not the ego's
“reasoning.” Its alien nature to the ego is proof you will not find the
answer there. Yet if it must be so, it must exist. And if it exists for
you and has your freedom as the purpose given it, you must be free to
*find* it.

<sup>54</sup> God's plan is simple—never circular and never self-defeating. He has
no Thoughts except the Self-*extending*, and in this your will must be
included. Thus, there must be a part of you that knows His Will and
shares it. It is not meaningful to ask if what must be is so. But it
*is* meaningful to ask why you are *unaware* of what is so, for this
must have an answer if the plan of God for your salvation is complete.
And it must *be* complete because its Source knows not of incompletion.
Where would the answer be but in the Source? And where are *you* but
there, where this same answer is? Your Identity, as much a true effect
of this same Source as is the answer, must therefore be together and the
same.

<sup>55</sup> Oh yes, you know this and more than this alone. Yet any part of
knowledge threatens dissociation as much as all of it. And all of it
*will* come with any part. Here is the part you can accept. What reason
points to you can see because the witnesses on its behalf are clear.
Only the totally insane can disregard them, and you have gone past this.
Reason is a means which serves the Holy Spirit's purpose in its own
right. It is not reinterpreted and redirected from the goal of sin as
are the others. For reason is beyond the ego's range of means.

<sup>56</sup> Faith and perception and belief can be misplaced and serve the great
deceiver's needs as well as truth. But reason has no place at all in
madness, nor can it be adjusted to fit its end. Faith and belief are
strong in madness, guiding perception toward what the mind has valued.
But reason enters not at all in this. For the perception would fall away
at once if reason were applied. There *is* no reason in insanity, for it
depends entirely on reason's absence. The ego never uses it because it
does not realize that it exists. The partially insane have access to it,
and only they have need of it. Knowledge does not depend on it, and
madness keeps it out.

<sup>57</sup> The part of mind where reason lies was dedicated by your will in
union with your Father's to the undoing of insanity. Here was the Holy
Spirit's purpose accepted and accomplished both at once. Reason is alien
to insanity, and those who use it have gained a means which *cannot* be
applied to sin. Knowledge is far beyond attainment of any kind. But
reason can serve to open doors you closed against it.

<sup>58</sup> You have come very close to this. Faith and belief have shifted, and
you have asked the question which the ego will *never* ask. Does not
your reason tell you now the question must have come from something that
you do not know but must belong to you? Faith and belief, upheld by
reason, cannot fail to lead to changed perception. And in this change is
room made way for vision. Vision extends beyond itself, as does the
purpose which it serves and all the means for its accomplishment.

