---
chapter: Twenty One
ctitle: The Inner Picture
title: The Responsibility for Sight
ref: Tx.21.III
---

<sup>13</sup> We have repeated how little is asked of you to learn this course. It
is the same small willingness you need to have your whole relationship
transformed to joy; the little gift you offer to the Holy Spirit for
which He gives you everything; the very little on which salvation rests;
the tiny change of mind by which the crucifixion is changed to
resurrection. And being true, it is so simple that it cannot fail to be
completely understood. Rejected yes, but *not* ambiguous. And if you
choose against it now, it will not be because it is obscure, but rather
that this little cost seemed in your judgment to be too much to pay for
peace.

<sup>14</sup> This is the only thing that you need do for vision, happiness,
release from pain, and the complete escape from sin, all to be given
you. Say only this, but mean it with no reservations, for here the power
of salvation lies:

<sup>15</sup> *I **am** responsible for what I see.<br/>
I chose the feelings I experience, and I decided<br/>
on the goal I would achieve.<br/>
And everything that seems to happen to me<br/>
I asked for and received as I had asked.*

<sup>16</sup> Deceive yourself no longer that you are helpless in the face of what
is done to you. Acknowledge but that you have been *mistaken*, and all
effects of your mistakes will disappear.

<sup>17</sup> It is impossible the Son of God be merely driven by events outside of
him. It is impossible that the happenings that come to him were not his
choice. His power of decision is the determiner of every situation in
which he seems to find himself by chance or accident. No accident nor
chance is possible within the universe as God created it, outside of
which is nothing. Suffer, and you decided sin was your goal. Be happy,
and you gave the power of decision to Him Who must decide for God for
you. This is the little gift you offer to the Holy Spirit, and even this
He gave to you to give yourself. For by this gift is given you the power
to release your savior that he may give salvation unto you.

<sup>18</sup> Begrudge not, then, this little offering. Withhold it, and you keep
the world as now you see it. Give it away, and everything you see goes
with it. Never was so much given for so little. In the holy instant is
this exchange effected and maintained. Here is the world you do not want
brought to the one you do. And here the one you do is given you
*because* you want it. Yet for this, the power of your wanting must
first be recognized. You must accept its *strength* and not its
weakness. You must perceive that what is strong enough to make a world
can let it go and can accept correction if it is willing to see that it
was wrong.

<sup>19</sup> The world you see is but the idle witness that you were right. This
witness is insane. You trained it in its testimony, and as it gave it
back to you, you listened and convinced yourself that what it saw was
true. You did this to *yourself*. See only this, and you will also see
how circular the reasoning on which your “seeing” rests. This was not
given you. This was your gift to you and to your brother. Be willing,
then, to have it taken from him and be replaced with truth. And as you
look upon the change in him, it will be given you to see it in yourself.

<sup>20</sup> Perhaps you do not see the need for you to give this little offering.
Look closer, then, at what it *is*. And very simply see in it the whole
exchange of separation for salvation. All that the ego is, is an idea
that it is possible that things should happen to the Son of God
*without* his will and thus without the Will of his Creator, Whose Will
cannot *be* separate from his own.

<sup>21</sup> This is the Son of God's *replacement* for his will, a mad revolt
against what must forever be. This is the statement that he has the
power to make God powerless and so to take it for himself and leave
himself without what God has willed for him. This is the mad idea you
have enshrined upon your altars and which you worship. And anything
which threatens this seems to attack your faith, for here is it
invested. Think not that you are faithless, for your belief and trust in
this is strong indeed.

<sup>22</sup> The Holy Spirit can give you faith in holiness and vision to see it
easily enough. But you have not left open and unoccupied the altar where
the gifts belong. Where *they* should be, you have set up your idols to
something else. This other will, which seems to tell you what must
happen, you gave reality. And what would show you otherwise must
therefore seem unreal. All that is asked of you is to make room for
truth. You are not asked to make or do what lies beyond your
understanding. All you are asked to do is *let it in*; only to stop your
interference with what will happen of itself; simply to recognize again
the presence of what you thought you gave away.

<sup>23</sup> Be willing for an instant to leave your altars free of what you
placed upon them, and what is really there you *cannot* fail to see. The
holy instant is not an instant of creation but of recognition. For
recognition comes of vision and suspended judgment. Then only is it
possible to look within and see what *must* be there plainly in sight
and wholly independent of inference and judgment. Undoing is not your
task, but it *is* up to you to welcome it or not. Faith and desire go
hand in hand, for everyone believes in what he wants.

<sup>24</sup> We have already said that wishful thinking is how the ego deals with
what it wants to make it so. There is no better demonstration of the
power of wanting, and therefore of faith, to make its goals seem real
and possible. Faith in the unreal leads to adjustments of reality to
make it fit the goal of madness. The goal of sin induces the perception
of a fearful world to justify its purpose. What you desire you *will*
see. And if its reality is false, you will uphold it by not realizing
all the adjustments you have introduced to make it so.

<sup>25</sup> When vision is denied, confusion of cause and effect becomes
inevitable. The purpose now becomes to keep obscure the cause of the
effect and make effect appear to be a *cause*. This seeming independence
of effect enables it to be regarded as standing by itself and capable of
serving as a cause of the events and feelings its maker thinks it
causes. Long ago we spoke of your desire to create your own Creator and
be father and not son to Him. This is the same desire. The Son is the
effect, whose Cause he would deny. And so he seems to *be* the cause,
producing real effects. Nothing can have effects without a cause and to
confuse the two is merely to fail to understand them both.

<sup>26</sup> It is as needful that you recognize you made the world you see as
that you recognize that you did not create yourself. *They are the same
mistake*. Nothing created not by your Creator has any influence over
you. And if you think what you have made can tell you what you see and
feel and place your faith in its ability to do so, you are denying your
Creator and believing that you made yourself. For if you think the world
you made has power to make you what it wills, you *are* confusing Son
and Father, effect and Source.

<sup>27</sup> The Son's creations are like his Father's. Yet in creating them, the
Son does not delude himself that he is independent of his Source. His
union with It is the Source of his creating. *Apart* from this he has no
power to create, and what he makes is meaningless. It changes nothing in
creation, depends entirely upon the madness of its maker, and cannot
serve to justify the madness. Your brother thinks he made the world with
you. Thus he denies creation. With you, he thinks the world he made,
made him. Thus he *denies* he made it.

<sup>28</sup> Yet the truth is you were both created by a loving Father Who created
you together and as one. See what “proves” otherwise, and you deny your
whole reality. But grant that everything which seems to stand between
you, keeping you from each other and separate from your Father, you made
in secret, and the instant of release has come to you. All its effects
are gone because its source has been uncovered. It is its seeming
independence of its source that kept you prisoner. This is the same
delusion that you are independent of the Source by which you were
created and have never left.

