---
chapter: Twenty One
ctitle: The Inner Picture
title: Perception and Wishes
ref: Tx.21.VIII
---

<sup>70</sup> Do you not see that all your misery comes from the strange belief
that you are powerless? Being helpless is the *cost* of sin.
Helplessness is sin's condition—the one requirement that it demands to
be believed. Only the helpless *could* believe in it. Enormity has no
appeal save to the little. And only those who first believe that they
*are* little could see attraction there. Treachery to the Son of God is
the defense of those who do not identify with him. And you are for him
or against him; either you love him or attack him, protect his unity or
see him shattered and slain by your attack.

<sup>71</sup> No one believes the Son of God is powerless. And those who see
themselves as helpless *must* believe that they are not the Son of God.
What can they be *except* his enemy? And what can they do but envy him
his power and by their envy make themselves afraid of it? These are the
dark ones, silent and afraid, alone and not communicating, fearful the
power of the Son of God will strike them dead and raising up their
helplessness against him. They join the army of the powerless, to wage
their war of vengeance, bitterness, and spite on him to make him one
with them. Because they do not know that they *are* one with him, they
know not whom they hate. They are indeed a sorry army, each one as
likely to attack his brother or turn upon himself as to remember they
thought they had a common cause.

<sup>72</sup> Frantic and loud and strong the dark ones seem to be. Yet they know
not their enemy, except they *hate* him. In hatred they have come
together but have not joined each other. For had they done so, hatred
would be impossible. The army of the powerless must be disbanded in the
presence of strength. Those who are strong are *never* treacherous
because they have no need to dream of power and to act out their dream.
How would an army act in dreams? Any way at all. It could be seen
attacking anyone with anything. Dreams have no reason in them. A flower
turns into a poisoned spear, a child becomes a giant, and a mouse roars
like a lion. And love is turned to hate as easily. This is no army, but
a madhouse. What seems to be a planned attack is bedlam.

<sup>73</sup> The army of the powerless is weak indeed. It has no weapons, and it
has no enemy. Yes, it can overrun the world and *seek* an enemy. But it
can never find what is not there. Yes, it can *dream* it found an enemy,
but this will shift even as it attacks, so that it runs at once to find
another and never comes to rest in victory. And as it runs, it turns
against itself, thinking it caught a glimpse of the great enemy which
always eludes its murderous attack by turning into something else. How
treacherous does this enemy appear, who changes so it is impossible even
to recognize him!

<sup>74</sup> Yet hate must have a target. There can be no faith in sin without an
enemy. Who that believes in sin would *dare* believe he has no enemy?
Could he admit that no one made him powerless? Reason would surely bid
him seek no longer what is not there to find. Yet first he must be
willing to perceive a world where it is not. It is not necessary that he
understand *how* he can see it. Nor should he try. For if he focuses on
what he cannot understand, he will but emphasize his helplessness and
let sin tell him that his enemy must be *himself*. But let him only ask
himself these questions, which he must decide to have it done for him:

<sup>75</sup> *Do I **desire** a world I rule instead of one which rules me?<br/>
Do I **desire** a world where I am powerful instead of helpless?<br/>
Do I **desire** a world in which I have no enemies and cannot sin?<br/>
And do I want to see what I denied **because** it is the truth?*

<sup>76</sup> You have already answered the first three questions but not yet the
last. For this one still seems fearful and unlike the others. Yet reason
would assure you they are all the same. We said this year would
emphasize the sameness of things that *are* the same. This final
question, which is indeed the last you need decide, still seems to hold
a threat the rest have lost for you. And this imagined difference
attests to your belief that truth may be the enemy you yet may find.
Here, then, would seem to be the last remaining hope of finding sin and
not accepting power.

<sup>77</sup> Forget not that the choice of truth or sin, power or helplessness, is
the choice of whether to attack or heal. For healing comes of power and
attack of helplessness. Whom you attack you *cannot* want to heal. And
whom you would have healed must be the one you chose to be *protected*
from attack. And what is this decision but the choice whether to see him
through the body's eyes or let him be revealed to you through vision?
*How* this decision leads to its effects is not your problem. But what
you *want* to see *must* be your choice. This is a course in *cause* and
not effect.

<sup>78</sup> Consider carefully your answer to the last question you have left
unanswered still. And let your reason tell you that it must *be*
answered and *is* answered in the other three. And then it will be clear
to you that, as you look on the effects of sin in any form, all you need
do is simply ask yourself,

<sup>79</sup> *Is this what I would see? Do I* ***want*** *this?*

<sup>80</sup> This is your *one* decision; this the condition for what occurs. It
is irrelevant to *how* it happens but not to *why*. You *have* control
of this. And if you choose to see a world without an enemy in which you
are not helpless, the means to see it *will* be given you.

<sup>81</sup> Why is the final question so important? Reason will tell you why. It
is the same as are the other three except in *time*. The others are
decisions which can be made and then unmade and made again. But truth is
constant and implies a state where vacillations are impossible. You can
desire a world you rule which rules you not, and change your mind. You
can desire to exchange your helplessness for power, and lose this same
desire as a little glint of sin attracts you. And you can want to see a
sinless world and let an “enemy” tempt you to use the body's eyes and
change what you desire.

<sup>82</sup> In content, all the questions *are* the same. For each one asks if
you are willing to exchange the world of sin for what the Holy Spirit
sees, since it is this the world of sin denies. And therefore those who
look on sin are seeing the denial of the real world. Yet the last
question adds the wish for *constancy* in your desire to see the real
world, so the desire becomes the *only* one you have. By answering the
final question “yes,” you add sincerity to the decisions you have
already made to all the rest. For only then have you renounced the
option to change your mind again. When it is this you do *not* want, the
rest *are* wholly answered.

<sup>83</sup> Why do you think you are unsure the others *have* been answered?
Could it be necessary they be asked so often, if they had? Until the
last decision has been made, the answer is both “yes” and “no.” For you
have answered “yes” without perceiving that “yes” *must* mean “not no.”
No one decides against his happiness, but he may do so if he does not
see he does it. And if he sees his happiness as ever changing, now this,
now that, and now an elusive shadow attached to nothing, he *does*
decide against it.

<sup>84</sup> Elusive happiness, or happiness in changing form that shifts with
time and place, is an illusion which has no meaning. Happiness *must* be
constant because it is attained by giving up the wish for the
*in*constant. Joy cannot be perceived *except* through constant vision.
And constant vision can be given only those who *wish* for constancy.
The power of the Son of God's desire remains the proof that he is wrong
who sees himself as helpless. Desire what you will, and you *will* look
on it and think it real. No thought but has the power to release or
kill. And none can leave the thinker's mind or leave him unaffected.

