---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: Communication and the Ego-Body Equation
ref: Tx.8.VII
---

<sup>53</sup> Attack is *always* physical. When attack in any form enters your
mind, you are *equating* yourself with a body. This is the ego's
*interpretation* of the body. You do not have to attack physically to
accept this interpretation. You are accepting it simply by the belief
that attack can *get* you something you want. If you did not believe
this, the idea of attack would have no appeal for you. When you equate
yourself with a body, you will *always* experience depression. When a
Child of God thinks of himself in this way, he is belittling himself and
seeing his brothers as similarly belittled. Since he can find himself
*only* in them, he has cut himself off from salvation.

<sup>54</sup> Remember that the Holy Spirit interprets the body only as a means of
communication. Being the communication link between God and His
separated Sons, the Holy Spirit interprets everything *you* have made in
the light of what *He* is. The ego *separates* through the body. The
Holy Spirit *reaches through* it to others. You do not perceive your
brothers as the Holy Spirit does, because you do not interpret their
bodies and yours solely as a means of joining their *minds* and uniting
them with yours and mine. This interpretation of the body will change
your mind entirely about its value. Of itself it has *none*.

<sup>55</sup> If you use the body for attack, it *is* harmful to you. If you use it
only to reach the minds of those who believe they are bodies and teach
them *through* the body that this is not so, you will begin to
understand the power of the mind that is in both of you. If you use the
body for this and *only* for this, you *cannot* use it for attack. In
the service of uniting, it becomes a beautiful lesson in communion,
which has value until communion *is*. This is God's way of making
unlimited what you have limited. The Holy Spirit does not see the body
as you do, because He knows the *only* reality anything can have is the
service it can render God on behalf of the function He has given it.

<sup>56</sup> Communication *ends* separation. Attack *promotes* it. The body is
beautiful or ugly, holy or savage, helpful or harmful, according to the
use to which it is put. And in the body of another you will *see* the
use to which you have put yours. If the body becomes for you a means
which you give to the Holy Spirit to use on behalf of union of the
Sonship, you will not see anything physical except as what it is. Use it
for truth, and you will see it truly. *Misuse* it, and you *will*
misunderstand it, because you have already done so *by* misusing it.
Interpret *anything* apart from the Holy Spirit, and you will mistrust
it. This will lead you to hatred and attack *and loss of peace*.

<sup>57</sup> Yet all loss comes only from your own misunderstanding. Loss of *any*
kind is impossible. When you look upon a brother as a physical entity,
*his* power and glory are lost *to you*, and so are *yours*. You *have*
attacked him, but you *must* have attacked yourself first. Do not see
him this way for your *own* salvation, which must bring him *his*. Do
not allow him to belittle himself in *your* mind, but give him freedom
from his belief in littleness and thus escape from *yours*. As part of
you, *he* is holy. As part of me, *you* are. To communicate with part of
God Himself is to reach beyond the Kingdom to its Creator through His
Voice, which He has established as part of *you*.

<sup>58</sup> Rejoice, then, that of yourselves you can do nothing. You are not
*of* yourselves. He of Whom you *are* has willed your power and glory
*for* you, with which you can perfectly accomplish His holy will for you
when you so will it yourself. He has not withdrawn His gifts from you,
but *you* have withdrawn them from Him. Let no Son of God remain hidden
for His Name's sake, because His Name is *yours*.

<sup>59</sup> Remember that the Bible says, “The Word (or thought) was made flesh.”
Strictly speaking this is impossible, since it seems to involve the
translation of one order of reality into another. Different orders of
reality merely *appear* to exist, just as different orders of miracles
do. Thought cannot be made into flesh except by belief, since thought is
*not* physical. Yet thought *is* communication, for which the body *can*
be used. This is the only *natural* use to which it *can* be put. To use
the body unnaturally is to lose sight of the Holy Spirit's purpose and
thus to confuse the goal of His curriculum.

<sup>60</sup> There is nothing so frustrating to a learner as to be placed in a
curriculum which he cannot learn. His sense of adequacy suffers, and he
*must* become depressed. Being faced with an impossible learning
situation, regardless of why it is impossible, is the most depressing
thing in the world. In fact, it is ultimately *why* the world is
depressing. The Holy Spirit's curriculum is *never* depressing, because
it is a curriculum of joy. Whenever the reaction to learning is
depression, it is only because the goal of the curriculum has been lost
sight of.

<sup>61</sup> In the world, not even the body is perceived as whole. Its purpose is
seen as fragmented into many functions which bear little or no
relationship to each other, so that it appears to be ruled by chaos.
Guided by the ego, it *is*. Guided by the Holy Spirit, it is *not*. It
becomes only a means by which the part of the mind you have separated
from your Soul can reach beyond its distortions and *return* to the
Soul. The ego's temple thus becomes the temple of the Holy Spirit, where
devotion to Him replaces devotion to the ego. In this sense, the body
*does* become a temple to God, because His Voice abides in it by
directing the use to which it is put.

<sup>62</sup> Healing is the result of using the body *solely* for communication.
Since this is natural, it heals by making whole, which is *also*
natural. All mind is whole, and the belief that part of it is physical,
or *not* mind, is a fragmented (or sick) interpretation. Mind *cannot*
be made physical, but it *can* be made manifest *through* the physical
if it uses the body to go *beyond* itself. By reaching *out*, the mind
extends itself. It does not *stop* at the body, for if it does, it is
blocked in its purpose. A mind which has been blocked has allowed itself
to be vulnerable to attack because it has *turned* *against itself.*

<sup>63</sup> The removal of blocks, then, is the *only* way to guarantee help and
healing. Help and healing are the normal expressions of a mind which is
working *through* the body but not *in* it. If the mind believes the
body is its *goal*, it *will* distort its perception of the body and, by
blocking its own extension beyond it, will induce illness by fostering
*separation*. Perceiving the body as a *separate* entity cannot *but*
foster illness because it is not true. A medium of communication will
*lose* its usefulness if it is used for anything else. To use a medium
of communication as a medium of *attack* is an obvious confusion in
purpose.

<sup>64</sup> To communicate is to join and to attack is to separate. How can you
do both simultaneously with the *same* *thing* and *not* suffer?
Perception of the body can be unified only by *one* purpose. This
releases the mind from the temptation to see the body in many lights and
gives it over *entirely* to the One Light in Which it can be really
understood at all. To confuse a learning device with a curriculum *goal*
is a fundamental confusion. Learning can hardly be arrested at its own
aids with hope of understanding either the aids *or* the learning's real
purpose. Learning must lead *beyond* the body to the reestablishment of
the power of the mind in it. This can be accomplished *only* if the mind
extends to other minds and does not *arrest* itself in its extension.

<sup>65</sup> The arrest of the mind's extension is the cause of *all* illness,
because *only* extension is the mind's function. The opposite of joy is
depression. When your learning promotes depression *instead* of joy, you
*cannot* be listening to God's joyous Teacher, and you *must* be
learning amiss. To see a body as anything except a means of pure
extension *is* to limit your mind and *hurt yourself.* Health *is*
therefore nothing more than united purpose. If the body is brought under
the purpose of the mind, the body becomes whole, because the *mind's*
purpose *is* one. Attack can only be an *assumed* purpose of the body,
because *apart* from the mind the body *has no purpose at all*.

<sup>66</sup> You are *not* limited by the body, and thought *cannot* be made
flesh. Yet mind can be manifested through the body if it goes beyond it
and *does not interpret it as limitation*. Whenever you see another as
limited *to* or *by* the body, you are imposing this limit *on*
*yourself*. Are you willing to *accept* this, when your whole purpose
for learning should be to *escape* from limitations? To conceive of the
body as a means of attack of any kind and to entertain even the
possibility that joy could *possibly* result is a clear-cut indication
of a poor learner. He has accepted a learning goal in obvious
contradiction to the unified purpose of the curriculum and is
interfering with his ability to accept its purpose as his *own*.

<sup>67</sup> Joy is unified purpose, and unified purpose is *only* God's. When
yours is unified, it *is* His. Interfere with His purpose, and you
*need* salvation. You have condemned yourself, but condemnation is *not*
of God. Therefore, it is not true. No more are any of the *results* of
your condemnation. When you see a brother as a body, you are condemning
him *because* you have condemned yourself. Yet if all condemnation is
unreal, and it *must* be unreal since it is a form of attack, then it
can *have* no results.

<sup>68</sup> Do not allow yourselves to suffer from the results of what is not
true. Free your minds from the belief that this is *possible*. In its
complete impossibility and your full awareness *of* its complete
impossibility lie your only hope for release. But what other hope would
you want? Freedom from illusions lies only in not *believing* them.
There *is* no attack, but there *is* unlimited communication and
therefore unlimited power and wholeness. The power of wholeness is
extension. Do not arrest your thought in this world, and you will open
your mind to creation in God.

