---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.8.I
---

You are hampered in your progress by your demands to know what you do
*not* know. This is actually a way of holding on to deprivation. You
cannot reasonably object to following instructions in a course *for*
knowing on the grounds that you do *not* know. The need for the course
is implicit in your objection. Knowledge is not the motivation for
learning this course. *Peace* is. As the prerequisite for knowledge,
peace *must* be learned. This is only because those who are in conflict
are *not* peaceful, and peace is the *condition* of knowledge, because
it is the condition of the Kingdom.

<sup>2</sup> Knowledge will be restored when you meet its conditions. This is not a
bargain made by God, Who makes *no* bargains. It is merely the result of
your misuse of His laws on behalf of a will that is not His. Knowledge
*is* His Will. If you are *opposing* His Will, how can you have
knowledge? I have told you what knowledge offers you, but it is clear
that you do not regard this as wholly desirable. If you did, you would
hardly be willing to throw it away so readily when the ego asks for your
allegiance. The distraction of the ego seems to interfere with your
learning, but the ego *has* no power to distract you unless you *give*
it the power.

<sup>3</sup> The ego's voice is an hallucination. You cannot expect it to say, “I
am not real.” Hallucinations *are* inaccurate perceptions of reality.
Yet you are not asked to dispel them alone. You are merely asked to
evaluate them in terms of their results to *you*. If you do not want
them on the basis of loss of peace, they will be removed from your mind
*for* you. Every response to the ego is a call to war, and war *does*
deprive you of peace. Yet in this war there is no opponent. *This* is
the reinterpretation of reality which you must make to secure peace, and
the only one you need *ever* make.

