---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: The Power of Joint Decision
ref: Tx.8.VI
---

<sup>42</sup> *We* are the joint will of the Sonship, whose wholeness is for all.
We begin the journey back by setting out *together* and gather in our
brothers as we *continue* together. Every gain in our strength is
offered for all, so they too can lay aside their weakness and add their
strength to us. God's welcome waits for us all, and He will welcome us
as I am welcoming you. Forget not the Kingdom of God for anything the
world has to offer. The world can add nothing to the power and the glory
of God and His holy Sons, but it *can* blind the Sons to the Father if
they behold it. You cannot behold the world and know God. Only one is
true.

<sup>43</sup> I am come to tell you that the choice of which is true is not yours.
If it were, you would have destroyed yourselves. Yet God did not will
the destruction of His creations, having created them for eternity. His
Will has saved you, not from yourselves, but from your *illusions* of
yourselves. He has saved you *for* yourselves. Let us glorify Him whom
the world denies, for over His Kingdom, it has no power. No one created
by God can find joy in anything *except* the eternal. That is not
because he is deprived of anything else, but because nothing else is
*worthy* of him. What God and His Sons create *is* eternal, and in this
and this only is their joy.

<sup>44</sup> Listen to the story of the prodigal son, and learn what God's
treasure is and *yours*: This son of a loving father left his home and
thought he squandered everything for nothing of any value, although he
did not know its worthlessness at the time. He was ashamed to return to
his father because he thought he had hurt him. Yet when he came home,
the father welcomed him with joy, because only the son himself *was* his
father's treasure. He *wanted* nothing else.

<sup>45</sup> God wants only His Son because His Son is His only treasure. You want
*your* creations as He wants *His.* Your creations are your gift to the
Holy Trinity, created in gratitude for *your* creation. They do not
leave you, any more than you have left *your* Creator, but they *extend*
your creation as God extended Himself to *you*. Can the creations of God
Himself take joy in what is not real? And what *is* real except the
creations of God and those which are created like His? *Your* creations
love you as your Soul loves your Father for the gift of creation. There
*is* no other gift which is eternal, and therefore there is no other
gift which is *true.*

<sup>46</sup> How, then, can you *accept* anything else or *give* anything else and
expect joy in return? And what else but joy would you *want*? You made
neither yourself nor your function. You made only the *decision* to be
unworthy of both. Yet you could not make *yourself* unworthy, because
you are the treasure of God. What *He* values *is* valuable. There can
*be* no question of its worth because its value lies in God's sharing
Himself with it and *establishing* its value forever.

<sup>47</sup> *Your* function is to add to God's treasure by creating *yours*. His
Will *to* you is His Will *for* you. He would not withhold creation from
you, because *His* joy is in it. You cannot find joy *except* as God
does. *His* joy lay in creating *you*, and He extends His Fatherhood to
you so that you can extend yourself as He did. You do not understand
this, because you do not understand *Him*. No one who does not know his
function can understand it, and no one *can* know his function unless he
knows who he *is.* Creation is the Will of God. His Will created you to
create. Your will was not created separate from His, and so it wills as
*He* wills.

<sup>48</sup> An “unwilling will” does not mean anything, \[because it is\] a
contradiction in terms which actually leaves nothing. \[You can make
yourself powerless only in a way that has no meaning at all.\] When you
*think* you are unwilling to will with God, *you are not thinking*.
God's Will *is* thought. It cannot be contradicted *by* thought. God
does not contradict *Himself*, and His Sons, who are like Him, cannot
contradict themselves *or* Him. Yet their thought is so powerful that
they can even imprison the mind of God's Son *if they so choose*. This
choice *does* make the Son's function unknown to *him*, but *never* to
his Creator. And *because* it is not unknown to his Creator, it is
forever knowable to him.

<sup>49</sup> There is no question but one you should ever ask of yourself: “Do I
*want* to know my Father's Will for me?” *He* will not hide it. He has
revealed it to me, because I asked it of Him and learned of what He had
already given. Our function is to function together, because *apart*
from each other we cannot function at all. The whole power of God's Son
lies in all of us, but not in any of us alone. God would not have us be
alone, because *He* does not will to be alone. That is why He created
His Son and gave him the power to create with Him.

<sup>50</sup> Our creations are as holy as we are, and we are the Sons of God
Himself and therefore as holy as He is. Through our creations, we extend
our love and thus increase the joy of the Holy Trinity. You do not
understand this for a very simple reason. You who are God's own treasure
do not regard yourselves as valuable. Given this belief, you cannot
understand *anything*. I share with God the knowledge of the value *He*
puts upon you. My devotion to you is of Him, being born of my knowledge
of myself *and* Him. We cannot *be* separated. Whom God has joined
cannot be separated, and God has joined all His Sons with Himself. Can
you be separated from your life and your being?

<sup>51</sup> The journey to God is merely the reawakening of the knowledge of
*where* you are always and *what* you are forever. It is a journey
without distance to a goal that has never changed. Truth can only be
*experienced*. It cannot be described, and it cannot be explained. I can
make you aware of the *conditions* of truth, but the experience is of
God. Together we can meet its conditions, but truth will dawn upon you
of itself.

<sup>52</sup> What God has willed for you *is* yours. He has given His Will to His
treasure, whose treasure it is. Your heart lies where your treasure is,
as His does. You who are beloved of God are wholly blessed. Learn this
of me, and free the holy will of all those who are as blessed as *you*
are.

