---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: The Holy Encounter
ref: Tx.8.IV
---

<sup>16</sup> Glory be to God in the highest and to *you*, because He has so willed
it. Ask and it shall be given you, because it has already *been* given.
Ask for light and learn that you *are* light. If you want understanding
and enlightenment, you *will* learn it, because your will to learn it is
your decision to listen to the Teacher who *knows* of light and can
therefore *teach* it to you. There is no limit on your learning, because
there is no limit on your *minds.* There is no limit on His Will to
teach, because He was created \[by unlimited Will in *order*\] *to*
teach. *Knowing* His function perfectly, He wills to fulfill it
perfectly, because that is His joy and *yours*.

<sup>17</sup> To fulfill the Will of God perfectly is the only joy and peace that
can be fully known, because it is the only function that can be fully
*experienced*. When this is accomplished, then, there *is* no other
experience. Yet the *wish* for other experience will block its
accomplishment, because God's Will cannot be forced upon you, being an
experience of total *willingness.* The Holy Spirit knows how to teach
this, but *you* do not. That is why you need Him and why God *gave* Him
to you. Only *His* teaching will release your will to God's, uniting it
with His power and glory and establishing them as *yours*. You share
them as God shares them, because this is the natural outcome of their
being.

<sup>18</sup> The will of Father and of the Son are one together *by their
extension*. Their extension is the *result* of their oneness, holding
their unity together by extending their *joint* will. This is perfect
creation by the perfectly created in union with Perfect Creator. The
Father *must* give fatherhood to His Son, because His own Fatherhood
must be extended outward. You who belong in God have the holy function
of extending His Fatherhood by placing *no* limits upon it. Let the Holy
Spirit teach you *how* to do this, for you will know what it *means* of
God Himself.

<sup>19</sup> When you meet anyone, remember it is a holy encounter. As you see
him, you will see yourself. As you treat him, you will treat yourself.
As you think of him, you will think of yourself. Never forget this, for
in him you will find yourself or lose sight of yourself. Whenever two
Sons of God meet, they are given another chance at salvation. Do not
leave anyone without giving salvation *to* him and receiving it
yourself, for I am always there with you in remembrance of *you*.

<sup>20</sup> The goal of the curriculum, regardless of the teacher you choose, is
*know thyself*. There is nothing else to learn. Everyone is looking for
himself and for the power and glory he thinks he has lost. Whenever you
are with anyone, you have another opportunity to find them. Your power
and glory are in him, *because* they are yours. The ego tries to find
them in *yourself*, because it does not know where to look. The Holy
Spirit teaches you that if you look *only* at yourself, you *cannot*
find yourself because that is not what you *are.*

<sup>21</sup> Whenever you are with a brother, you are learning what you are
because you are *teaching* what you are. He will respond either with
pain or with joy, depending on which teacher *you* are following. *He*
will be imprisoned or released according to your decision, *and so will
you*. Never forget your responsibility to him, because it is your
responsibility to *yourself*. Give him *his* place in the Kingdom, and
you will have *yours*. The Kingdom *cannot* be found alone, and you who
*are* the Kingdom cannot find *yourselves* alone.

<sup>22</sup> To achieve the goal of the curriculum, then, you *cannot* listen to
the ego. *Its* purpose is to *defeat* its own goal. The ego does not
know this, because it does not know anything. But *you* can know this,
and you *will* know it if you are willing to look at what the ego has
made of *you*. This *is* your responsibility, because once you have
really done this, you *will* accept the Atonement for yourself. What
other choice could you make? Having made this choice, you will begin to
learn and understand why you have believed that when you met someone
else, you had thought that he *was* someone else. And every holy
encounter in which *you* enter fully will teach you *this is not so.*

<sup>23</sup> You can encounter *only* part of yourself, because you are part of
God, Who *is* everything. His power and glory are everywhere, and you
*cannot* be excluded from them. The ego teaches that your strength is in
you *alone*. The Holy Spirit teaches that *all* strength is in God and
*therefore* in you. God wills *no one* suffer. He does not will anyone
to suffer for a wrong decision, *including* you. That is why He has
given you the means for *undoing* it. Through His power and glory, all
your wrong decisions are undone, *completely* releasing you *and* your
brothers from *every* imprisoning thought *any* part of the Sonship has
accepted. Wrong decisions have no power *because* they are not true. The
imprisonment which they *seem* to produce is no more true than *they*
are.

<sup>24</sup> Power and glory belong to God alone. So do *you*. God gives
*whatever* belongs to Him, because He gives of Himself, and *everything*
belongs to Him. Giving of *your* self is the function He gave you.
Fulfilling it perfectly will teach you what you *have* of Him, and this
will teach you what you *are* in Him. You *cannot* be powerless to do
this, because this *is* your power. Glory is God's gift to you, because
that is what *He* is. See this glory everywhere to learn what *you* are.

