---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: The Direction of the Curriculum
ref: Tx.8.II
---

<sup>4</sup> Those whom you perceive as opponents are *part* of your peace, which
*you* are giving up by attacking them. How can you *have* what you give
up? You *share* to have, but you do not give it up yourself. When you
give up peace, you are *excluding* yourself from it. This is a condition
which is so alien to the Kingdom that you cannot understand the state
which prevails within it. Your past learning must have taught you the
wrong things simply because it has not made you happy. On this basis
alone, its value should be questioned.

<sup>5</sup> If learning aims at change, and that is *always* its purpose, are you
satisfied with the changes *your* learning has brought you?
Dissatisfaction with learning outcomes must be a sign of learning
failure since it means that you did not get what you *want*. The
curriculum of the Atonement is the opposite of the curriculum you have
established for yourselves, *but so is its outcome*. If the outcome of
yours has made you unhappy and if you *want* a different one, a change
in the curriculum is obviously necessary.

<sup>6</sup> The first change that must be introduced is a change in *direction*. A
meaningful curriculum *cannot* be inconsistent. If it is planned by two
teachers, each believing in diametrically opposed ideas, it cannot *be*
integrated. If it is carried out by these two teachers simultaneously,
each one merely *interferes* with the other. This leads to fluctuation,
but *not* to change. The volatile *have no* direction. They cannot
choose one because they cannot relinquish the other, even if the other
does not exist. Their conflicted curriculum teaches them *all*
directions exist and gives them no rationale for choice.

<sup>7</sup> The total senselessness of such a curriculum must be fully recognized
before a real change in direction becomes possible. You *cannot* learn
simultaneously from two teachers who are in *total* disagreement about
everything. Their joint curriculum presents an impossible learning task.
They are teaching you *entirely* different things in *entirely*
different ways, which might be possible except for the crucial fact that
both are *teaching you about yourself.* Your reality is unaffected by
both, but if you *listen* to both, your mind will be split about what
your reality *is.*

