---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: The Acceptance of Reality
ref: Tx.8.X
---

<sup>90</sup> Fear of the Will of God is one of the strangest beliefs that the
human mind has ever made. This could not possibly have occurred unless
the mind were *already* profoundly split, making it possible for the
mind to be *afraid* of what it really is. It is apparent that reality
cannot “threaten” anything *except* illusions, since reality can only
uphold truth. The very fact that the Will of God, which is what you
*are*, is perceived as fearful to you demonstrates that you *are* afraid
of what you are. It is not, then, the Will of God of which you *are*
afraid, but *yours*. Your will is *not* the ego's, and that is *why* the
ego is against you. What seems to be the fear of God is really only the
fear *of your own reality.*

<sup>91</sup> It is impossible to learn anything consistently in a state of panic.
If the purpose of this course is to learn what you are and if you have
already *decided* that what you are is fearful, then it *must* follow
that you will *not* learn this course. Yet you might remember that the
reason *for* the course is that you do *not* know who you are. If you do
not know your reality, how would you know whether it is fearful or not?

<sup>92</sup> The association of truth and fear, which would be highly artificial
at most, is particularly inappropriate in the minds of those who do not
know what truth *is*. All that this kind of association means is that
you are arbitrarily endowing something quite beyond your awareness with
something you *do not want*. It is evident, then, that you are judging
something of which you are totally *unaware*. You have set this strange
situation up so that it is completely impossible to escape from it
*without* a Guide who *does* know what your reality is. The purpose of
this Guide is merely to remind you of what you *want*. He is not
attempting to force an alien will *upon* you. He is merely making every
possible effort, within the limits you impose on Him, to *re-establish*
your own will in your consciousness.

<sup>93</sup> You have *imprisoned* your will in your *unconscious*, where it
remains available but cannot help you. When we said that the Holy
Spirit's function is to sort out the true from the false in your
unconscious, we meant that He has the power to look into what *you* have
hidden and perceive the Will of God there. *His* perception of this will
can make it real to *you* because He is in your mind and therefore He
*is* your reality. If, then, His perception of your mind brings its
reality to *you*, He *is* teaching you what you are.

<sup>94</sup> The only source of fear in this whole process can *only* be what you
think you *lose*. Yet it is only what the Holy Spirit sees that you can
possibly *have.* We have emphasized many times that the Holy Spirit will
never call upon you to sacrifice *anything*. But if you ask the
sacrifice of reality of *yourselves*, the Holy Spirit *must* remind you
that this is not God's Will *because* it is not yours. There is *no
difference* between your will and God's. If you did not have split
minds, you would recognize that willing is salvation *because* it is
communication. It is impossible to communicate in alien tongues. You and
your Creator can communicate through creation because that, and *only*
that, *is* your joint will.

<sup>95</sup> Divided wills do not communicate because they speak for different
things *to the same mind*. This loses the ability to communicate simply
because confused communication does not mean *anything.* A message
cannot be said to be communicated *unless* it makes sense. How sensible
can your messages be when you ask for what you do *not* want? Yet as
long as you are *afraid* of your will, this is precisely what you *will*
ask for. You may insist that the Holy Spirit does not answer you, but it
might be wiser to consider the kind of *asker* you are.

<sup>96</sup> You do *not* ask only for what you want. This is *solely* because you
are afraid you might *receive* it, *and you would*. That is really why
you persist in asking the teacher who could not possibly *teach* you
your will. Of him you can *never* learn it, and this gives you the
illusion of safety. Yet you cannot be safe *from* truth but only *in*
it. Reality is the *only* safety. Your will is your salvation *because*
it is the same as God's. The separation is nothing more than the belief
that it is *different*.

<sup>97</sup> No mind can believe that its will is *stronger* than God's. If, then,
a mind believes that *its* will is different from His, it can only
decide either that there *is* no God or that *God's Will is fearful*.
The former accounts for the atheist and the latter for the martyr.
Martyrdom takes many forms, the category including *all* doctrines which
hold that God demands sacrifices of *any* kind. Either basic type of
insane decision will induce panic, because the atheist believes he is
alone, and the martyr believes that God is crucifying him. Both really
fear abandonment and retaliation, but the atheist is more reactive
against abandonment and the martyr against retaliation.

<sup>98</sup> The atheist maintains that God has left him, but he does not care. He
will, however, become very fearful and hence very angry if anyone
suggests that God has *not* left him. The martyr, on the other hand, is
more aware of guilt and, believing that punishment is inevitable,
attempts to teach himself to *like* it. The truth is, very simply, that
no one wants *either* abandonment *or* retaliation. Many people *seek*
both, but it is still true that they do not *want* them. Can you ask the
Holy Spirit for “gifts” such as these and actually expect to *receive*
them? \[The Holy Spirit is totally incapable of giving you anything that
does not come from God. His task is not to make anything for you.\] He
cannot make you want something you do *not* want. When you ask the
Universal Giver for what you do not want, you are asking for what
*cannot* be given, *because it was never created*. It was never created,
because it was never your will for *you*.

<sup>99</sup> Ultimately everyone must remember the Will of God, because ultimately
everyone must recognize *himself*. This recognition *is* the recognition
that *his will and God's are one*. In the presence of truth, there are
*no* unbelievers and *no* sacrifices. In the security of reality, fear
is totally meaningless. To deny what *is* can only *seem* to be fearful.
Fear cannot be real without a cause, and God is the *only* Cause. God is
Love, and you *do* want Him. This *is* your will. Ask for this and you
*will* be answered because you will be asking only for what *belongs* to
you.

<sup>100</sup> When you ask the Holy Spirit for what would hurt you, He cannot
answer, because *nothing* can hurt you *and so you are asking for
nothing*. *Any* desire which stems from the ego *is* a desire for
nothing and to ask for it is *not a request*. It is merely a denial in
the *form* of a request. The Holy Spirit is not concerned with form at
all, being aware only of *meaning*. The ego cannot ask the Holy Spirit
for *anything* because there is *complete communication failure* between
them. Yet *you* can ask for *everything* of the Holy Spirit because
*your* requests are real, being of your will. Would the Holy Spirit deny
the Will of God? And could He fail to recognize it in His Sons?

<sup>101</sup> The energy which you withdraw from creation you expend on fear. This
is not because your energy is limited but because *you have limited it.*
You do not recognize the enormous waste of energy which you expend in
denying truth. What would you say of someone who persisted in attempting
the impossible, believing that to *achieve* it is *success*? The belief
that you *must* have the impossible in order to be happy is totally at
variance with the principle of creation. God *could* not will that
happiness *depended* on what you could never *have.*

<sup>102</sup> The fact that God is love does not require belief, but it *does*
require acceptance. It is indeed possible for you to *deny* facts,
although it is impossible for you to *change* them. If you hold your
hands over your eyes, you will *not* see because you are interfering
with the laws of seeing. If you deny love, you will *not* know it
because your cooperation is *the law of its being*. You cannot change
laws you did not make, and the laws of happiness were created *for* you,
not *by* you.

<sup>103</sup> Attempts of any kind to deny what *is* are fearful, and if they are
strong, they *will* induce panic. Willing *against* reality, though
impossible, can be *made* into a very persistent goal, *even though you
do not want it.* But consider the result of this strange decision. You
are *devoting* your mind to what you do not want. How real can this
devotion *be*? If you do not want it, it was never created. If it was
never created, it is nothing. Can you *really* devote yourself to
nothing?

<sup>104</sup> God in His devotion to you created you devoted to *everything* and
*gave* you what you are devoted to. Otherwise, you would not have been
created perfect. Reality *is* everything, and therefore you have
everything *because* you are real. You cannot make the unreal, because
the *absence* of reality is fearful, and fear cannot *be* created. As
long as you believe that fear is possible, *you will not create*.
Opposing orders of reality *make reality meaningless*, and reality *is*
meaning.

<sup>105</sup> Remember, then, that God's Will is *already* possible and nothing
else will *ever* be. This is the simple acceptance of reality, because
only this *is* real. You cannot *distort* reality and *know what it is*.
And if you *do* distort reality, you will experience anxiety,
depression, and ultimately panic, because you are trying to *make*
yourself unreal. When you feel these things, do not try to look *beyond*
yourself for truth, for truth can only be *within* you. Say, therefore,

<sup>106</sup> *Christ is in me, and where He is God **must** be, for Christ
is **part** of Him.*

