---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: The Body as Means or End
ref: Tx.8.VIII
---

<sup>69</sup> Attitudes toward the body are attitudes toward *attack*. The ego's
definitions of *everything* are childish and always based on what it
believes a thing is *for*. This is because it is incapable of true
generalizations and equates what it sees with the function *it* ascribes
to it. It does *not* equate it with what it *is*. To the ego, the body
is to *attack* with. Equating *you* with the body, it teaches that *you*
are to attack with, because this is what it believes. The body, then, is
not the source of its own health. The body's condition lies solely in
your interpretation of its function.

<sup>70</sup> The reason why definitions in terms of function are inferior is that
they may well be inaccurate. Functions are part of being since they
arise from it, but the relationship is not reciprocal. The whole *does*
define the part, but the part does *not* define the whole. This is as
true of knowledge as it is of perception. The reason to *know* in part
is to know *entirely* is because of the fundamental *difference* between
knowledge and perception. In perception the whole is built up of parts,
which *can* separate and reassemble in different constellations.
Knowledge never changes, so *its* constellation is permanent. The only
areas in which part-whole relationships have *any* meaning are those in
which change is possible. There *is* no difference between the whole and
the part where change is impossible.

<sup>71</sup> The body exists in a world which *seems* to contain two voices which
are fighting for its possession. In this perceived constellation, the
body is regarded as capable of shifting its control from one to the
other, making the concept of both health *and* sickness possible. The
ego makes a fundamental confusion between means and ends, as it always
does. Regarding the body as an end, the ego has no *real* use for it
because it is *not* an end. You must have noticed an outstanding
characteristic of every end that the ego has accepted as its own. When
you have achieved it, *it has not satisfied you*. This is why the ego is
forced to shift from one end to another without ceasing, so that *you*
will continue to hope that it can yet offer you something.

<sup>72</sup> It has been particularly difficult to overcome the ego's belief in
the body as an end, because this is synonymous with the belief in
*attack* as an end. The ego has a real *investment* in sickness. If you
are sick, how can you *object* to the ego's firm belief that you are
*not* invulnerable? This is a particularly appealing argument from the
ego's point of view because it obscures the obvious *attack* which
underlies the sickness. If you accepted *this* and also decided
*against* attack, you could not give this false witness to the ego's
stand.

<sup>73</sup> It is hard to perceive sickness *as* a false witness, because you do
not realize that it *is* entirely out of keeping with what you want.
This witness, then, *appears* to be innocent and trustworthy, because
you have not seriously cross-examined him. If you did, you would not
consider sickness such a strong witness on behalf of the ego's views.

<sup>74</sup> A more honest statement would be as follows: Those who *want* the ego
are predisposed to defend it. Therefore, their choice of witnesses
should be suspect from the beginning. The ego does not call upon
witnesses who would disagree with its case, *nor does the Holy Spirit*.
We have said that judgment *is* the function of the Holy Spirit and one
which He is perfectly equipped to fulfill. The ego as a judge gives
anything *but* an impartial judgment. When the ego calls on a witness,
it has *already* made the witness an ally.

<sup>75</sup> It is still true that the body has no function of itself, because it
is *not* an end. The ego, however, establishes it *as* an end because as
such it will lose its *true* function. This is the purpose of
*everything* the ego does. Its sole aim is to lose sight of the function
of *everything*. A sick body does not make any *sense*. It *could* not
make sense, because sickness is not what the body is *for*. Sickness is
meaningful only if the two basic premises on which the ego's
interpretation of the body rests are true. Specifically, these are that
the body is for attack and that you *are* a body. Without these
premises, sickness is completely inconceivable.

<sup>76</sup> Sickness is a way of demonstrating that *you can be hurt*. It is a
witness to your frailty, your vulnerability, and your extreme need to
depend on *external* guidance. The ego uses this as its best argument
for your need for *its* guidance. It dictates endless prescriptions for
*avoiding* catastrophic outcomes. The Holy Spirit, perfectly aware of
the same data, does not bother to analyze them at all. If the data are
meaningless, there is no point in considering them. The function of
truth is to collect data which are *true*. There is no point in trying
to make sense out of meaningless data. *Any* way you handle them results
in nothing. The more complicated the results become, the harder it may
be to recognize their nothingness, but it is not necessary to examine
*all* possible outcomes to which premises give rise to judge them truly.

<sup>77</sup> A learning device is *not* a teacher. *It* cannot tell you how *you*
feel. You do not know how you feel, because you have *accepted* the
ego's confusion, and *you* think that a learning device *can* tell you
how you feel. Sickness is merely another example of your insistence on
asking the guidance of a teacher *who does not know the answer*. The ego
is *incapable* of knowing how you feel. When we said that the ego does
not know *anything*, we said the one thing about the ego that *is*
wholly true. But there *is* a corollary; if knowledge is being and the
ego has no knowledge, then the ego has no *being*.

<sup>78</sup> You might well ask how the voice of something which does not exist
can be so insistent. Have you seriously considered the distorting power
of something you *want*, even if it is *not* true? You have had many
instances of how what you want can distort what you see and hear. No one
can doubt the ego's skill in building up false cases. Nor can anyone
doubt your willingness to listen until *you* will not to tolerate
anything *except* truth. When *you* lay the ego aside, it will be gone.
The Holy Spirit's Voice is as loud as your willingness to listen. It
cannot be louder without violating your will, which the Holy Spirit
seeks to free but *never* to command.

<sup>79</sup> The Holy Spirit teaches you to use your body *only* to reach your
brothers, so He can teach His message *through* you. This will heal them
and *therefore* heal *you.* Everything used in accordance with its
function as the Holy Spirit sees it *cannot* be sick. Everything used
otherwise *is.* Do not allow the body to be a mirror of a split mind. Do
not let it be an image of your own perception of littleness. Do not let
it reflect your will to attack. Health is the natural state of anything
whose interpretation is left to the Holy Spirit, Who perceives no attack
on anything. Health is the result of relinquishing *all* attempts to use
the body lovelessly. Health is the beginning of the proper perspective
on life under the guidance of the one Teacher Who knows what life is,
being the Voice for Life Itself.

