---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: The Rationale for Choice
ref: Tx.8.III
---

<sup>8</sup> There *is* a rationale for choice. Only one Teacher *knows* what your
reality is. If learning that is the *purpose* of the curriculum, you
must learn it of Him. The ego does not *know* what it is trying to
teach. It is trying to teach you what you are *without* knowing it. The
ego is expert only in confusion. It does not understand anything else.
As a teacher, then, it is totally confused and *totally confusing.* Even
if you could disregard the Holy Spirit entirely, which is quite
impossible, you could learn nothing from the ego because the ego *knows*
nothing.

<sup>9</sup> Is there *any* possible reason for choosing a teacher such as this?
Does the total disregard of anything it teaches make anything *but*
sense? Is *this* the teacher to whom a Son of God should turn to find
*himself*? The ego has never given you a sensible answer to *anything*.
Simply on the grounds of your own experience with the ego's teaching,
should not this alone disqualify it as your future teacher? Yet the ego
has done more harm to your learning than this alone. Learning is joyful
if it leads you along your natural path and facilitates the development
of what you *have*. When you are taught *against* your nature, however,
you will *lose* by your learning because your learning will imprison
you. Your will is *in* your nature and therefore *cannot* go against it.

<sup>10</sup> The ego cannot teach you anything as long as your will is free,
because you will not *listen* to it. It is *not* your will to be
imprisoned, *because* your will is free. That is why the ego is the
*denial* of free will. It is *never* God who coerces you because He
*shares* His Will with you. His Voice teaches *only* His Will, but that
is not the Holy Spirit's lesson because that is what you *are*. The
*lesson* is that your will and God's cannot be out of accord, *because*
they are one. This is the undoing of *everything* the ego tries to
teach. It is not, then, only the direction of the curriculum which must
be unconflicted, but also the *content*.

<sup>11</sup> The ego wants to teach you that you want to *oppose* God's Will. This
unnatural lesson cannot *be* learned, but the *attempt* to learn it is a
violation of your own freedom and makes you afraid of your will
*because* it is free. The Holy Spirit opposes *any* imprisoning of the
will of a Son of God, *knowing* that the will of the Son *is* the
Father's. The Holy Spirit leads you steadily along the path of freedom,
teaching you how to disregard or look beyond *everything* that would
hold you back.

<sup>12</sup> We said before that the Holy Spirit teaches you the difference
between pain and joy. That is the same as saying that He teaches you the
difference between imprisonment and freedom. *You* cannot make this
distinction *without* Him. That is because you have taught yourself that
imprisonment *is* freedom. Believing them to be the same, how *can* you
tell them apart? Can you ask the part of your mind that taught you to
believe they *are* the same to teach you the *difference* between them?

<sup>13</sup> The Holy Spirit's teaching takes only *one* direction and has only
*one* goal. His direction is freedom, and His goal is God. Yet He cannot
conceive of God without *you*, because it is not God's Will to *be*
without you. When you have learned that your will *is* God's, you could
no more will to be without Him than He could will to be without *you*.
This *is* freedom and this *is* joy. Deny yourself this and you *are*
denying God His Kingdom because He created you *for* this. When we said,
“All power and glory are yours because the Kingdom is His,” this is what
we meant.

<sup>14</sup> The Will of God is without limit, and all power and glory lie within
it. It is boundless in strength and in love and in peace. It has no
boundaries because its extension is unlimited, and it encompasses all
things because it created all things. By creating all things, it made
them part of itself. *You* are the Will of God, because this is how you
were created. Because your Creator creates *only* like Himself, you
*are* like Him. You are part of Him Who *is* all power and glory and are
therefore as unlimited as He is.

<sup>15</sup> To what else *except* all power and glory can the Holy Spirit appeal
to restore God's Kingdom? His appeal, then, is merely to what the
Kingdom *is* and for its own acknowledgment of what it is. When you
acknowledge this, you bring the acknowledgment automatically to
everyone, because you *have* acknowledged everyone. By *your*
recognition you awaken *theirs*, and through theirs *yours* is extended.
Awakening runs easily and gladly through the Kingdom in answer to the
call of God. This is the natural response of every Son of God to the
Voice of his Creator, because it is the Voice for *his* creations and
for his own extension.

