---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: The Light of the World
ref: Tx.8.V
---

<sup>25</sup> If God's Will for you is complete peace and joy, unless you
experience *only* this you must be refusing to *acknowledge* His Will.
His Will does not vacillate, being changeless forever. When you are not
at peace, it can only be because you do not believe you *are* in Him.
Yet He is all in all. His peace is complete, and you *must* be included
in it. His laws govern you, because they govern *everything*. You cannot
exempt yourself from His laws, although you can disobey them. Yet if you
do, and *only* if you do, you *will* feel lonely and helpless, because
you are denying yourself everything.

<sup>26</sup> I am come as a light into a world that *does* deny itself everything.
It does this simply by dissociating itself *from* everything. It is
therefore an illusion of isolation, maintained by fear of the same
loneliness which *is* its illusion. I have told you that I am with you
always, even to the end of the world. That is *why* I am the light of
the world. If I am with you in the loneliness of the world, *the
loneliness is gone.* You *cannot* maintain the illusion of loneliness if
you are *not* alone. My purpose, then, *is* to overcome the world. I do
not attack it, but my light must dispel it because of what it *is*.

<sup>27</sup> Light does not attack darkness, but it *does* shine it away. If my
light goes with you everywhere, *you* shine it away *with* me. The light
becomes *ours*, and you cannot abide in darkness any more than darkness
can abide wherever you go. The remembrance of me *is* the remembrance of
yourself and of Him Who sent me to you. You were in darkness until God's
Will was done completely by *any* part of the Sonship. When this was
done, it was perfectly accomplished by *all*. How else could it *be*
perfectly accomplished? My mission was simply to unite the will of the
Sonship with the Will of the Father by being aware of the Father's Will
myself. This is the awareness I came to give *you*, and your problem in
accepting it *is* the problem of this world. Dispelling it is salvation,
and in this sense I *am* the salvation of the world.

<sup>28</sup> The world must despise and reject me, because the world *is* the
belief that love is impossible. *Your* reactions to me are the reactions
of the world to God. If you will accept the fact that I am with you, you
are *denying* the world and *accepting* God. My will is His, and *your*
will to hear me is the decision to hear His Voice and abide in His Will.
As God sent me to you, so will I send you to others, and I will go to
them *with* you so we can teach them \[union and peace\].

<sup>29</sup> Do you not think the world *needs* peace as much as you do? Do you
not want to *give* it to the world as much as you want to *receive* it?
For unless you do, you will *not* receive it. If you will to have it of
me, you *must* give it. Rehabilitation does not come from anyone else.
You can have guidance from without, but you must *accept* it from
within. The guidance must \[become\] what *you* want, or it will be
meaningless to you. That is why rehabilitation is a collaborative
venture.

<sup>30</sup> I can tell you what to do, but this will not help you unless you
collaborate by believing that I *know* what to do. Only then will your
mind choose to follow me. Without *your* will, you cannot *be*
rehabilitated. *Motivation* to be healed is the crucial factor in
rehabilitation. Without this you are deciding *against* healing, and
your veto of my will for you *makes healing impossible*. If healing *is*
our joint will, unless our wills *are* joined you *cannot* be healed.
This is obvious when you consider what healing is *for*. Healing is the
way in which the separation is overcome. Separation is overcome by
*union*. It cannot be overcome by separating.

<sup>31</sup> The *will* to unite must be unequivocal, or the will *itself* is
divided or not whole. Your will is the means by which you determine your
own condition, because will is the *mechanism* of decision. It is the
power by which you separate or join and experience pain or joy
accordingly. My will cannot *overcome* yours, because yours is as
powerful as mine. If it were not so, the Sons of God would be unequal.
All things are possible through our *joint* will, but my will alone
cannot help you. Your will is as free as mine, and God Himself would not
go against it. *I* cannot will what God does *not* will. I can offer you
my will to make *yours* invincible by this sharing, but I cannot
*oppose* yours without competing with it and thereby violating God's
Will for you.

<sup>32</sup> Nothing God created can oppose your will, as nothing God created can
oppose His. God *gave* your will its power, which I can only acknowledge
in honor of *His*. If you want to be like me, I will help you, knowing
that we *are* alike. If you want to be different, I will wait until you
change your mind. I can *teach* you, but only you can choose to *listen*
to my teaching. How else can it be, if God's Kingdom *is* freedom?
Freedom cannot be learned by tyranny of any kind, and the perfect
equality of *all* God's Sons cannot be recognized through the dominion
of one will over another. God's Sons are equal in will, all being the
Will of their Father. This is the *only* lesson I came to teach, knowing
that it is true.

<sup>33</sup> When your will is *not* mine, it is not our Father's. This means that
you have imprisoned *yours* and have not *let* it be free. Of yourselves
you can do nothing, because of yourselves you *are* nothing. I am
nothing without the Father, and *you* are nothing without *me*, because
by denying the Father you deny *yourself*. I will *always* remember you,
and in *my* remembrance of you lies your remembrance of *yourself.* In
our remembrance of *each other* lies our remembrance of God, and in this
remembrance lies your freedom, because your freedom *is* in Him. Join
then with me in praise of Him *and* you whom He created. This is our
gift of gratitude to Him, which He will share with *all* His creations,
to whom He gives equally whatever is acceptable to Him. *Because* it is
acceptable to Him, it is the gift of freedom, which *is* His Will for
all His Sons. By *offering* freedom, *you* will be free.

<sup>34</sup> Freedom is the only gift you can offer to God's Sons, being an
acknowledgment of what *they* are and what *He* is. Freedom is creation,
because it is love. What you seek to imprison you do *not* love.
Therefore, when you seek to imprison anyone, including *yourself*, you
do not love him, and you cannot identify *with* him. When you imprison
yourself, you are losing sight of your true identification with me and
with the Father. Your identification *is* with the Father and with the
Son. It *cannot* be with one and not the other. If you are part of one,
you must be part of the other, because they *are* one.

<sup>35</sup> The Holy Trinity is holy, *because* it is one. If you exclude
*yourself* from this union, you are perceiving the Holy Trinity as
separated. You must be included *in* It, because It *is* everything.
Unless you take your place in It and fulfill your function as *part* of
It, It is as bereft as *you* are. No part of It can be imprisoned if Its
truth is to be known. Can you be separated from your identification and
be at peace? Dissociation is not a solution; it is a *delusion*. The
delusional believe that truth will assail them, and so they do not *see*
it, because they *prefer* the delusion. Judging truth as something they
do *not* want, they perceive deception and block knowledge.

<sup>36</sup> Help them by offering them *your* unified will on their behalf, as I
am offering you mine on *yours*. Alone we can do nothing, but *together*
our wills fuse into something whose power is far beyond the power of its
separate parts. By *not being separate*, the Will of God is established
*in* ours and *as* ours. This will is invincible, *because* it is
undivided. The undivided will of the Sonship is the perfect creator,
being wholly in the likeness of God, Whose Will it *is.* *You* cannot be
exempt from it if you are to understand what *it* is and what *you* are.
By separating your will *from* mine, you are exempting yourself from the
Will of God, which *is* yourself.

<sup>37</sup> Yet to heal is still to make whole. Therefore, to heal is to *unite*
with those who are like you, because perceiving this likeness *is* to
recognize the Father. If *your* perfection is in Him and *only* in Him,
how can you *know* it without recognizing Him? The recognition of God
*is* the recognition of yourself. There *is* no separation of God and
His creation. You will learn this as you learn that there is no
separation of *your* will and *mine*. Let the love of God shine upon you
by your acceptance of me. *My* reality is yours *and* His. By joining
your will with mine, you are signifying your awareness that the Will of
God is one.

<sup>38</sup> God's Oneness and ours are not separate, because His Oneness
*encompasses* ours. To join with me is to restore His power to you,
*because* we are sharing it. I offer you only the *recognition* of His
power in you, but in that lies *all* truth. As *we* unite, we unite with
Him. Glory be to the union of God and His holy Sons! All glory lies in
them *because* they are united. The miracles we do bear witness to the
Will of the Father for His Son and to our joy in uniting *with* His Will
for us.

<sup>39</sup> When you unite with me, you are uniting *without* the ego, because I
have renounced the ego in myself and therefore *cannot* unite with
yours. *Our* union is therefore the way to renounce the ego in
*yourself.* The truth in both of us is *beyond* the ego. By willing
that, you *have* gone beyond it toward truth. Our success in
transcending the ego is guaranteed by God, and I can share \[my perfect
confidence in His promise, because I know He gave me\] this confidence
for both of us and *all* of us. I bring God's peace back to all His
Children, because I received it of Him for us all. Nothing can prevail
against our united wills, because nothing can prevail against God's.
Would you know the Will of God for *you*? Ask it of me who knows it
*for* you, and you will find it. I will deny you nothing, as God denies
*me* nothing.

<sup>40</sup> Ours is simply the journey back to God, Who is our home. Whenever
fear intrudes anywhere along the road to peace, it is *always* because
the ego has attempted to join the journey with us *and* *cannot do so*.
Sensing defeat and angered by it, the ego regards itself as rejected and
becomes retaliative. You are invulnerable to its retaliation, *because I
am with you*. On this journey, you have chosen me as your companion
*instead* of the ego. Do not try to hold on to both, or you will try to
go in different directions and will lose the way.

<sup>41</sup> The ego's way is not mine, but it is also *not yours*. The Holy
Spirit has *one* direction for *all* minds, and the one He taught me is
*yours*. Let us not lose sight of His direction through illusions, for
only illusions of another direction can obscure the one for which God's
Voice speaks in all of us. Never accord the ego the power to interfere
with the journey because it *has* none, \[and\] the journey is the way
to what is true. Leave *all* deception behind and reach beyond all
attempts of the ego to hold you back. I go before you, because I *am*
beyond the ego. Reach therefore for my hand, because you *want* to
transcend the ego. My will will *never* be wanting, and if you *want* to
share it you *will*. I give it willingly and gladly, because I need you
as much as you need me.

