---
chapter: Eight
ctitle: The Journey Back
title: The Answer to Prayer
ref: Tx.8.XI
---

<sup>107</sup> Everyone who has ever tried to use prayer to request something has
experienced what appears to be failure. This is not only true in
connection with specific things which might be harmful but also in
connection with requests which are strictly in line with this course.
The latter, in particular, might be incorrectly interpreted as “proof”
that the course does not mean what it says. You must remember, however,
that the course does state, and repeatedly, that its purpose is the
*escape* from fear.

<sup>108</sup> Let us suppose, then, that what you request of the Holy Spirit *is*
what you really want, but you are still *afraid* of it. Should this be
the case, your *attainment* of it would no longer *be* what you want,
even if *it* is. This accounts for why certain *specific* forms of
healing are not achieved, even though the state of healing *is.* It
frequently happens that an individual asks for physical healing because
he is fearful of *bodily* harm. At the same time, however, if he *were*
healed physically, the threat to his thought system would be
considerably *more* fearful to him than its physical expression. In this
case he is not really asking for *release* from fear but for the removal
of a symptom which *he* has selected. This request is, therefore, *not*
for healing at all.

<sup>109</sup> The Bible emphasizes that *all* prayers are answered, and this must
be true if no effort is wasted. The very fact that one has asked the
Holy Spirit for *anything* will ensure a response. Yet it is equally
certain that *no* response given by the Holy Spirit will *ever* be one
which would increase fear. It is possible that His answer will not be
heard at all. It is *impossible*, however, that it will be lost. There
are many answers which you have already received but have not yet
*heard*. I assure you that they are waiting for you. It is indeed true
that no effort is wasted.

<sup>110</sup> If you would know your prayers are answered, never doubt a Son of
God. Do not question him and do not confound him, for your faith in him
is your faith in *yourself*. If you would know God and His Answer,
believe in me whose faith in you cannot be shaken. Can you ask of the
Holy Spirit truly and doubt your brother? Believe his words are true
because of the truth which is *in* him. You will unite with the truth in
him, and his words will *be* true. As you hear *him*, you will hear
*me.* *Listening* to truth is the only way you can hear it now and
finally *know* it.

<sup>111</sup> The message your brother gives you is *up to you*. What does he say
to you? What would you *have* him say? Your decision *about* him
determines the message you receive. Remember that the Holy Spirit is in
him, and His Voice speaks to you *through* him. What can so holy a
brother tell you *except* truth? But are you *listening* to it? Your
brother may not know who he is, but there is a light in his mind which
*does* know. This light can shine into yours, making *his* words true
and making *you* able to hear them. His words *are* the Holy Spirit's
answer to you. Is your faith in him strong enough to let you hear?

<sup>112</sup> Salvation is of your brother. The Holy Spirit extends from your mind
to his and answers *you*. You cannot hear the Voice for God in yourself
alone because you are *not* alone. And His answer is only for what you
*are*. You will not know the trust I have in you unless you *extend* it.
You will not trust the guidance of the Holy Spirit or believe that it is
for you unless you hear it in others. It *must* be for your brother
*because* it is for you. Would God have created a Voice for you alone?
Could you hear His answer *except* as He answers *all* of God's Sons?
Hear of your brother what you would have me hear of you, for you would
not want *me* to be deceived.

<sup>113</sup> I love you for the truth in you, as God does. Your deceptions may
deceive *you*, but they *cannot* deceive *me*. Knowing what you are, I
*cannot* doubt you. I hear only the Holy Spirit in you, who speaks to me
through *you*. If you would hear *me*, hear my brothers in whom God's
Voice speaks. The answer to *all* prayers lies in them. You will be
answered as you hear the answer in *everyone*. Do not listen to anything
else, or you will not hear truth.

<sup>114</sup> Believe in your brothers *because* I believe in you, and you will
learn that my belief in you is justified. Believe in me *by* believing
in them for the sake of what God gave them. They *will* answer you if
you learn to ask truth of them. Do not ask for blessings without
blessing them, for only in this way can you learn how blessed *you* are.
By following this way, you *are* looking for the truth in you. This is
not going *beyond* yourself but *toward* yourself. Hear only God's
Answer in His Sons, and you *are* answered.

<sup>115</sup> To disbelieve is to side against or to *attack*. To believe is to
accept and to *side with*. To believe is not to be credulous but to
accept and *appreciate*. What you do not believe, you do not appreciate,
and you *cannot* be grateful for what you do not value. There is a price
you will pay for judgment because judgment *is* the setting of a price.
And as you set it, you *will* pay it.

<sup>116</sup> If paying is equated with *getting*, you will set the price low but
demand a high *return*. You will have forgotten, however, that \[to
price is to value, so\] your return is in *proportion* to your judgment
of worth. If paying is associated with *giving*, it cannot be perceived
as loss, and the *reciprocal* relationship of giving and receiving will
be recognized. The price will then be set high because of the value of
the return. The price for *getting* is to lose sight of value, making it
inevitable that you will *not* value what you receive. Valuing it
little, you will not appreciate it and will not *want* it.

<sup>117</sup> Never forget, then, that *you* have set the value on what you
receive and have priced it by what you give. To believe that it is
possible to get much for little is to believe that you can bargain with
God. God's laws are *always* fair and perfectly consistent. *By* giving
you receive. But to receive is to *accept*, not to get. It is impossible
not to *have*, but it *is* possible not to *know* you have. The
recognition of having is the willingness for *giving*, and *only* by
this willingness can you recognize what you have. What you give is
therefore the value you put on what you have, being the exact measure of
the value you put upon it. And this, in turn, is the measure of how much
you *want* it.

<sup>118</sup> You can *ask* of the Holy Spirit, then, only by giving *to* Him, and
you can *give* to Him only where you *see* Him. If you see Him in
everyone, consider how much you will be *asking* of Him and *how much
you will receive*. He will deny you nothing because you have denied
*Him* nothing, and so you can share everything. This is the way, and the
*only* way, to have His answer because His answer is all you *can* ask
for and *want*. Say, then, to everyone,

<sup>119</sup> *Because I will to know myself, I see you as God's Son and my
brother.*

