---
chapter: Nineteen
ctitle: Beyond the Body
title: The Unreality of Sin
ref: Tx.19.IV
---

<sup>25</sup> The attraction of guilt is found in sin, not error. Sin will be
repeated *because* of this attraction. Fear can become so acute that the
sin is denied the acting out, but while the guilt remains attractive the
mind will suffer and not let go of the idea of sin. For guilt still
calls to it, and the mind hears it and yearns for it, making itself a
willing captive to its sick appeal. Sin is an idea of evil that *cannot*
be corrected and will be forever desirable. As an essential part of what
the ego thinks you are, you will *always* want it. And only an avenger
with a mind unlike your own could stamp it out through fear.

<sup>26</sup> The ego does not think it possible that love, not fear, is really
called upon by sin and always *answers*. For the ego brings sin to
*fear*, demanding punishment. Yet punishment is but another form of
guilt's protection, for what is deserving punishment must have been
really *done*. Punishment is always the great preserver of sin, treating
it with respect and honoring its enormity. \[What must be punished *must
be true*. And what is true *must* be eternal and *will* be repeated
endlessly.\] For what you think is real you *want* and will not let it
go. An error, on the other hand, is not attractive. What you see clearly
as a mistake you *want* corrected.

<sup>27</sup> Sometimes a sin can be repeated over and over with obviously
distressing results but without the loss of its appeal. And suddenly you
change its status from a sin to a mistake. Now you will not repeat it;
you will merely stop and let it go unless the guilt *remains*. For then
you will but change the *form* of sin, granting that it was an error but
keeping it uncorrectable. This is not really a change in your
perception, for it is *sin* that calls for punishment, not error. The
Holy Spirit *cannot* punish sin. Mistakes He recognizes and would
correct them all as God entrusted Him to do. But sin He knows not, nor
can He recognize mistakes which cannot be corrected. For a mistake which
cannot be corrected is meaningless to Him.

<sup>28</sup> Mistakes are *for* correction, and they call for nothing else. What
calls for punishment must call for nothing. Every mistake *must* be a
call for love. What, then, is sin? What could it be but a mistake you
would keep hidden—a call for help that you would keep unheard and thus
unanswered? In time the Holy Spirit clearly sees the Son of God can make
mistakes. On this you share His vision. Yet you do not share His
recognition of the difference between time and eternity. And when
correction is completed, time *is* eternity.

<sup>29</sup> Time is like a downward spiral which seems to travel down from a
long, unbroken line along another plane but which in no way breaks the
line or interferes with its smooth continuousness. Along the spiral, it
seems as if the line must have been broken. Yet at the line, its
wholeness is apparent. Everything seen from the spiral is misperceived,
but as you approach the line, you realize that it was not affected by
the drop into another plane at all. Yet from the plane, the line seems
discontinuous. And this is but an error in perception which can be
easily corrected in the *mind*, although the body's eyes will see no
change. The eyes see many things the mind corrects, and you respond, not
to the eyes' illusions, but to the mind's *corrections*.

<sup>30</sup> You see the line as broken, and as you shift to different aspects of
the spiral, the line looks different. Yet in your mind is One Who knows
it is unbroken and forever changeless. This One can teach you how to
look on time differently and see *beyond* it, but not while you believe
in sin. In error, yes; for this can be corrected by the mind. But sin is
the belief that your perception is unchangeable and that the mind must
accept as true what it is told through it. If it does not obey, the mind
is judged insane. The only power which could change perception is thus
kept impotent, held to the body by the *fear* of changed perception
which its teacher, who is one with it, would bring.

<sup>31</sup> When you are tempted to believe that sin is real, remember this: If
sin is real, both God and you are not. If creation is extension, the
Creator must have extended Himself, and it is impossible that what is
part of Him is totally unlike the rest. If sin is real, God must be at
war with Himself. He must be split and torn between good and evil—partly
sane and partially insane. For He must have created what wills to
destroy Him and has the *power* to do so. Is it not easier to believe
that *you* have been mistaken than to believe in this?

<sup>32</sup> While you believe that your reality or your brother's is bounded by a
body, you will believe in sin. While you believe that bodies can unite,
you will find guilt attractive and believe that sin is precious. For the
belief that bodies limit mind leads to a perception of the world in
which the proof of separation seems to be everywhere. And God and His
creation seem to be split apart and overthrown. For sin would *prove*
what God created holy could not prevail against it nor remain itself
before the power of sin. Sin is perceived as *mightier* than God, before
which God Himself must bow and offer His creation to its conqueror. Is
this humility or madness?

<sup>33</sup> If sin were real, it would forever be beyond the hope of healing. For
there would be a power beyond God's, capable of making another will
which could attack His Will and *overcome* it and give His Son a will
apart from His and *stronger*. And each part of God's fragmented
creation would have a different will, opposed to His and in eternal
opposition to Him and to each other. Your holy relationship has as its
purpose now the goal of proving this is impossible. Heaven has smiled
upon it, and the belief in sin has been uprooted in its smile of love.
You see it still because you do not realize that its *foundation* has
gone. Its source has been removed, and so it can be cherished but a
little while before it vanishes. Only the habit of *looking* for it
still remains.

<sup>34</sup> And yet you look with Heaven's smile upon your lips and Heaven's
blessing on your sight. You will not see it long. For in the new
perception, the mind corrects it when it seems to be seen, and it
becomes invisible. And errors are quickly recognized and quickly given
to correction to be healed, not hidden. You will be healed of sin and
all its ravages the instant that you give it no power over each other.
And you will help each other overcome mistakes by joyously releasing one
another from the belief in sin.

<sup>35</sup> In the holy instant, you will see the smile of heaven shining on
*both* of you. And you will shine upon each other in glad acknowledgment
of the grace that has been given you. For sin will not prevail against a
union Heaven has smiled upon. Your perception was healed in the holy
instant Heaven gave you. Forget what you have seen and raise your eyes
in faith to what you *now* can see. The barriers to heaven will
disappear before your holy sight, for you who were sightless have been
given vision, and you can see. Look not for what has been removed but
for the glory that has been restored for you to see.

<sup>36</sup> Look upon your Redeemer and behold what He would show you in each
other, and let not sin arise again to blind your eyes. For sin would
keep you separate, but your Redeemer would have you look upon each other
as yourself. Your relationship is now a temple of healing—a place where
all the weary ones can come and find rest. Here is the rest that waits
for all after the journey. And it is brought nearer to all by your
relationship.

<sup>37</sup> As this peace extends from deep inside yourselves to embrace all the
Sonship and give it rest, it will encounter many obstacles. Some of them
you will try to impose. Others will seem to arise from elsewhere—from
your brothers and from various aspects of the world outside. Yet peace
will gently cover them, extending past completely unhindered. The
extension of the Holy Spirit's purpose from your relationship to others
to bring them gently in \[has already begun. This is the way in which He
will bring means and goal in line. The peace He laid deep within *both*
of you\] will quietly extend to every aspect of your lives, surrounding
both of you with glowing happiness and the calm awareness of complete
protection. And you will carry its message of love and safety and
freedom to everyone who draws nigh unto your temple, where healing waits
for him.

<sup>38</sup> You will not wait to give him this, for you will call to him and he
will answer you, recognizing in your call the Call of God. And you will
draw him in and give him rest, as it was given you. All this will you
do. Yet the peace which already lies deeply within must first expand and
flow across the obstacles you placed before it. This will you do, for
nothing undertaken with the Holy Spirit remains unfinished. You can
indeed be sure of nothing you see outside you, but of this you *can* be
sure: the Holy Spirit asks that you offer Him a resting-place where you
will rest in Him. He answered you and entered your relationship. Would
you not now return His graciousness and enter into a relationship with
Him? For it is He Who offered your relationship the gift of holiness,
without which it would have been forever impossible to appreciate each
other.

<sup>39</sup> The gratitude you owe to Him He asks but that *you* receive for Him.
And when you look with gentle graciousness upon each other, you *are*
beholding Him. For you are looking where He *is* and not apart from Him.
You cannot see the Holy Spirit, but you *can* see your brothers truly.
And the light in them will show you all that you need to see. When the
peace in you has been extended to encompass everyone, the Holy Spirit's
function here will be accomplished. What need is there for seeing then?
When God has taken the last step Himself, the Holy Spirit will gather
all your thanks and gratitude which you have offered Him and lay them
gently before His Creator in the name of His most holy Son. And the
Father will accept them in His Name. What need is there of seeing in the
presence of His gratitude?

