---
chapter: Nineteen
ctitle: Beyond the Body
title: "Obstacles to Peace"
ref: Tx.19.V
---

## a. The First Obstacle: The Desire to Get Rid of It

<sup>40</sup> The first obstacle that peace must flow across is your desire to get
*rid* of it. For it cannot extend unless you *keep* it. You are the
center from which it radiates outward to call the others in. You are its
home, its tranquil dwelling-place from which it gently reaches out but
never leaving *you*. If you would make it homeless, how can it abide
within the Son of God? If it would spread across the whole creation, it
must begin with you and *from* you reach to everyone who calls and bring
him rest by joining you.

<sup>41</sup> Why would you want peace homeless? What do you think that it must
dispossess to dwell with you? What seems to be the cost you are so
unwilling to pay? The little barrier of sand still stands between you.
Would you reinforce it *now*? You are not asked to let it go for
yourselves alone. Christ asks it of you for Himself. He would bring
peace to everyone, and how can He do this *except* through you? Would
you let a little bank of sand, a wall of dust, a tiny seeming barrier,
stand between your brothers and salvation? And yet, it *is* this little
remnant of attack you cherish still against each other that is the first
obstacle the peace in you encounters in its going forth. This little
wall of hatred would still oppose the Will of God and keep it limited.

<sup>42</sup> The Holy Spirit's purpose rests in peace within you. Yet you are
still unwilling to let it join you wholly. You still oppose the Will of
God, just by a little. And that little is a limit you would place upon
the whole. God's Will is One, not many. It has no opposition, for there
is none beside it. What you would still contain behind your little
barrier and keep separate from each other seems mightier than the
universe, for it would hold back the universe and its Creator. This
little wall would hide the purpose of Heaven and keep it *from* Heaven.

<sup>43</sup> Would you thrust salvation away from the *giver* of salvation? For
such have you become. Peace could no more depart from you than from God.
Fear not this little obstacle. It cannot contain the Will of God. Peace
*will* flow across it and join you without hindrance. Salvation cannot
*be* withheld from you. It is your purpose. You *cannot* will apart from
this. You have no *purpose* apart from each other nor apart from the one
you asked the Holy Spirit to share with you. The little wall will fall
away so quietly beneath the wings of peace! For peace will send its
messengers from you to all the world. And barriers will fall away before
their coming as easily as those which you would interpose will be
surmounted.

<sup>44</sup> To overcome the world is no more difficult than to surmount your
little wall. For in the miracle of your relationship, without this
barrier, is *every* miracle contained. There is no order of difficulty
in miracles, for they are all the *same*. Each is a gentle winning over
from the appeal of guilt to the appeal of love. How can this *fail* to
be accomplished, wherever it is undertaken? Guilt can raise no real
barriers against it. And all that seems to stand between you must fall
away because of the appeal you answered. For from you who answered, He
Who answered you would call. His home is in your holy relationship. Do
not attempt to stand between Him and His holy purpose, for it is yours.
But let Him quietly extend the miracle of your relationship to everyone
contained in it, as it was given.

<sup>45</sup> There is a hush in Heaven, a happy expectancy, a little pause of
gladness in acknowledgment of the journey's end. For Heaven knows you
well, as you know Heaven. No illusions stand between you now. Look not
upon the little wall of shadows. The sun has risen *over* it. How can a
shadow keep you from the sun? No more can you be kept by shadows from
the light in which illusions end. Every miracle is but the end of an
illusion. Such was the journey; such its ending. And in the goal of
truth which you accepted must *all* illusions end.

<sup>46</sup> The little insane wish to get rid of Him Who you invited in and push
Him out *must* produce conflict. As you look upon the world, this little
wish, uprooted and floating aimlessly, can land and settle briefly upon
anything, for it *has* no purpose now. Before the Holy Spirit entered to
abide with you, it seemed to have a *mighty* purpose; the fixed and
unchangeable dedication to sin and its results. Now it is aimless,
wandering pointlessly, causing no more than tiny interruptions in love's
appeal.

<sup>47</sup> This feather of a wish, this tiny illusion, this microscopic remnant
of the belief in sin, is all that remains of what once seemed to be the
world. It is no longer an unrelenting barrier to peace. Its pointless
wandering makes its results appear to be more erratic and unpredictable
than before. Yet what *could* be more unstable than a tightly-organized
delusional system? Its seeming stability is its pervasive *weakness*,
which extends to everything. The variability which the little remnant
induces merely indicates its limited results.

<sup>48</sup> How mighty can a little feather be before the great wings of truth?
Can it oppose an eagle's flight or hinder the advance of summer? Can it
interfere with the effects of summer's sun upon a garden covered by the
snow? See but how easily this little wisp is lifted up and carried away,
never to return, and part with it in gladness, not regret. For it is
nothing in itself and stood for nothing when you had greater faith in
its protection. Would you not rather greet the summer sun than fix your
gaze upon a disappearing snowflake and shiver in remembrance of the
winter's cold?

## The Attraction of Guilt

<sup>49</sup> The attraction of guilt produces fear of love, for love would never
look on guilt at all. It is the nature of love to look upon only the
truth, for there it sees itself, with which it would unite in holy union
and completion. As love must look past fear, so must fear see love not.
For love contains the end of guilt as surely as fear depends on it.
\[Love is attracted *only* to love.\] Overlooking guilt completely, it
sees no fear. Being wholly without attack, it *could* not be afraid.
Fear is attracted to what love sees not, and each believes that what the
other looks upon does not exist. Fear looks on guilt with just the same
devotion that love looks on itself. And each has messengers which they
send forth and which return to them with messages written in the
language in which their going forth was asked.

<sup>50</sup> Love's messengers are gently sent and return with messages of love
and gentleness. The messengers of fear are harshly ordered to seek out
guilt and cherish every scrap of evil and of sin which they can find,
losing none of them on pain of death and laying them respectfully before
their lord and master. Perception cannot obey two masters, each asking
for messages of different things in different languages. What fear would
feed upon, love overlooks. What fear demands, love cannot even see.

<sup>51</sup> The fierce attraction which guilt holds for fear is wholly absent
from love's gentle perception. What love would look upon is meaningless
to fear and quite invisible. Relationships in this world are the result
of how the world is seen. And this depends on which emotion was called
on to send its messengers to look upon it and return with word of what
they saw. Fear's messengers are trained through terror, and they tremble
when their master calls upon them to serve him. For fear is merciless
even to its friends. Its messengers steal guiltily away in hungry search
of guilt, for they are kept cold and starving and made very vicious by
their master, who allows them to feast only upon what they return to
him. No little shred of guilt escapes their hungry eyes. And in their
savage search for sin, they pounce on any living thing they see and
carry it screaming to their master to be devoured.

<sup>52</sup> Send not these savage messengers into the world to feast upon it and
to prey upon reality. For they will bring you word of bones and skin and
flesh. They have been taught to seek for the corruptible and to return
with gorges filled with things decayed and rotted. To them such things
are beautiful because they seem to allay their savage pangs of hunger.
For they are frantic with the pain of fear and would avert the
punishment of him who sends them forth by offering him what they hold
dear.

<sup>53</sup> The Holy Spirit has given you love's messengers to send instead of
those you trained through fear. They are as eager to return to you what
they hold dear as are the others. If you send them forth, they will see
only the blameless and the beautiful, the gentle and the kind. They will
be as careful to let no little act of charity, no tiny expression of
forgiveness, no little breath of love escape their notice. And they will
return with all the happy things they found, to share them lovingly with
you. Be not afraid of *them*. They offer you salvation. Theirs are the
messages of safety, for they see the world as kind.

<sup>54</sup> If you send forth only the messengers the Holy Spirit gives you,
*wanting* no messages but theirs, you will see fear no more. The world
will be transformed before your sight, cleansed of all guilt and softly
brushed with beauty. The world contains no fear which you laid not upon
it. And none you cannot ask love's messengers to remove from it and see
it still. The Holy Spirit has given you His messengers to send to each
other and return to each with what love sees. They have been given to
replace the hungry dogs of fear you sent instead. And they go forth to
signify the *end* of fear.

<sup>55</sup> Love, too, would set a feast before you on a table covered with a
spotless cloth, set in a quiet garden where no sound but singing and a
softly joyous whispering is ever heard. This is a feast which honors
your holy relationship and at which everyone is welcomed as an honored
guest. And in a holy instant, grace is said by everyone together as they
join in gentleness before the table of communion. And I will join you
there, as long ago I promised and promise still. For in your new
relationship am I made welcome. And where I am made welcome, there *I
am*.

<sup>56</sup> I am made welcome in the state of grace, which means you have at last
forgiven me. For I became the symbol of your sin, and so I had to die
instead of you. To the ego sin *means* death, and so Atonement is
achieved through murder. Salvation is looked upon as a way by which the
Son of God was killed instead of *you*.

<sup>57</sup> Yet would I offer you my body, you whom I love, *knowing* its
littleness? Or would I teach that bodies cannot keep us apart? Mine was
no greater value than yours; no better means for communication of
salvation, but *not* its Source. No one can die for anyone, and death
does not atone for sin. Yet you can *live* to show it is not real. The
body *does* appear to be the symbol of sin while you believe that it can
get you what you want. While you believe that it can give you pleasure,
you will also believe that it can bring you pain.

<sup>58</sup> To think you could be satisfied and happy with so little is to hurt
yourself, and to limit the happiness that you would have calls upon pain
to fill your meager store and make your lives complete. This *is*
completion, as the ego sees it. For guilt creeps in where happiness has
been removed and substitutes for it. Communion is another kind of
completion which goes beyond guilt because it goes beyond the body.

## b. The Second Obstacle: The Belief the Body is Valuable for What it Offers

<sup>59</sup> We said that peace must first surmount the obstacle of your desire to
get rid of it. Where the attraction of guilt holds sway, peace is not
*wanted*. The second obstacle that peace must flow across, and closely
related to the first, is the belief that the body is valuable for what
it offers. For here is the attraction of guilt made manifest in the body
and *seen* in it.

<sup>60</sup> This \[is\] the value that you think peace would rob you of. This is
what you believe that it would dispossess and leave you homeless. And it
is this for which you would deny a home to peace. This “sacrifice” you
feel to be too great to make, too much to ask of you.

<sup>61</sup> Is it a sacrifice or a release? What has the body really given you
that justifies your strange belief that in it lies salvation? Do you not
see that this is the belief in death? Here is the focus of the
perception of Atonement as murder. Here is the source of the idea that
love is fear. The Holy Spirit's messengers are sent far beyond the body,
calling the mind to join in holy communion and be at peace. Such is the
message that I gave them for you.

<sup>62</sup> It is only the messengers of fear that see the body, for they look
for what can suffer. Is it a sacrifice to be *removed* from what can
suffer? The Holy Spirit does not demand you sacrifice the hope of the
body's pleasure; it *has* no hope of pleasure. But neither can it bring
you fear of pain. Pain is the only “sacrifice” the Holy Spirit asks, and
this He *would* remove.

<sup>63</sup> Peace is extended from you only to the eternal, and it reaches out
from the eternal in *you*. It flows across all else. The second obstacle
is no more solid than the first. For you will neither to get rid of
peace *nor* limit it. What are these obstacles which you would interpose
between peace and its going forth but barriers you place between your
will and its accomplishment? You *want* communion, not the feast of
fear. You *want* salvation, not the pain of guilt. And you want your
Father, *not* a little mound of clay, to be your home. In your holy
relationship is your Father's Son. He has not lost communion with Him
nor with himself. When you agreed to join each other, you acknowledged
this is so. This has no cost, but it has *release* from cost.

<sup>64</sup> You have paid very dearly for your illusions, and nothing you have
paid for brought you peace. Are you not *glad* that Heaven cannot be
sacrificed, and sacrifice cannot be asked of you? There *is* no obstacle
which you can place before our union, for in your holy relationship, I
am there already. We will surmount all obstacles together, for we stand
within the gates and not outside. How easily the gates are opened from
within to let peace through to bless the tired world! Can it be
difficult for us to walk past barriers together when you have joined the
limitless? The end of guilt is in your hands to give. Would you stop now
to look for guilt in each other?

<sup>65</sup> Let me be to you the symbol of the *end* of guilt, and look upon each
other as you would look on me. Forgive me all the sins you think the Son
of God committed. And in the light of your forgiveness, he will remember
who he is and forget what never was. I ask for your forgiveness, for if
you are guilty, so must I be. But if I surmounted guilt and overcame the
world, *you* were with me. Would you see in me the symbol of guilt or of
the *end* of guilt, remembering that what I signify to you, you see
within *yourself*?

<sup>66</sup> From your holy relationship truth proclaims the truth, and love looks
on itself. Salvation flows from deep within the home you offered to my
Father and to me. And we are there together in the quiet communion in
which the Father and the Son are joined. Oh come ye faithful to the holy
union of the Father and Son in you! And keep you not apart from what is
offered you in gratitude for giving peace its home in Heaven. Send forth
to all the world the joyous message of the end of guilt, and all the
world will answer. Think of your happiness as everyone offers you
witness of the end of sin and shows you that its power is gone forever.
Where can guilt be, when the belief in sin is gone? And where is death,
when its great advocate is heard no more?

<sup>67</sup> Forgive me your illusions and release me from punishment for what I
have not done. So will you learn the freedom that I taught by teaching
freedom to each other and so releasing me. I am within your holy
relationship, yet you would imprison me behind the obstacles you raise
to freedom and bar my way to you. Yet it is not possible to keep away
One Who is there already. And in Him it *is* possible that our
communion, where we are joined already, will be the focus of the new
perception that will bring light to all the world, contained in *you*.

## Pleasure and Pain

<sup>68</sup> Your little part is but to give the Holy Spirit the whole *idea* of
sacrifice. And to accept the peace He gave instead, without the limits
which would hold its extension back and so would limit *your* awareness
of it. For what He gives must be extended if you would have its
limitless power and use it for the Son of God's release. It is not this
you would be rid of, and having it you *cannot* limit it. If peace is
homeless, so are you and so am I. And He Who is our home is homeless
*with* us. Is this your will? Would you forever be a wanderer in search
of peace? Would you invest your hope of peace and happiness in what
*must* fail?

<sup>69</sup> Faith in the eternal is always justified, for the eternal is forever
kind, infinite in its patience, and wholly loving. It will accept you
wholly and give you peace. Yet it can unite only with what *already* is
at peace in you, immortal as itself. The body can bring you neither
peace nor turmoil; neither pain nor joy. It is a means and not an end.
It has *no* purpose of itself, but only what is given to it. The body
will seem to be whatever is the means for reaching the goal that you
assign to it. \[Only the mind can set a purpose, and only mind can see
the means for its accomplishment and justify its use.\] Peace and guilt
are both conditions of the mind to be attained. And these conditions are
the home of the emotion which called them forth and therefore is
compatible with them. But think you which it is that is compatible with
*you*.

<sup>70</sup> Here is your choice, and it *is* free. But all that lies in it *will*
come with it, and what you think you are can never be apart from it. The
body is the great seeming betrayer of faith. In it lies disillusionment
and the seeds of faithlessness, but only if you ask of it what it cannot
give. Can your mistake be reasonable grounds for depression and
disillusionment and for retaliative attack on what you think has failed
you? Use not your error as the justification for your faithlessness. You
have not sinned, but you have been mistaken in what is faithful. And the
correction of your mistake will *give* you grounds for faith.

<sup>71</sup> It is impossible to seek for pleasure through the body and *not* find
pain. It is essential that this relationship be understood, for it is
one the ego sees as *proof* of sin. It is not really punitive at all. It
is but the inevitable result of equating yourself with the body, which
is the *invitation* to pain. For it invites fear to enter and become
your purpose. The attraction of guilt *must* enter with it, and whatever
fear directs the body to do is therefore painful. It will share the pain
of *all* illusions, and the illusion of pleasure will be the *same* as
pain.

<sup>72</sup> Is not this inevitable? Under fear's orders, the body will pursue
guilt, serving its master whose attraction to guilt maintains the whole
illusion of its existence. This, then, *is* the attraction of pain.
Ruled by this perception, the body becomes the servant of pain, seeking
it dutifully and obeying the idea that pain is pleasure. It is this idea
that underlies all of the ego's heavy investment in the body. And it is
this insane relationship which it keeps hidden and yet feeds upon. To
*you* it teaches that the body's pleasure is happiness. Yet to *itself*
it whispers, “It is death.”

<sup>73</sup> Why should the body be anything to you? Certainly what it is made of
is not precious. And just as certainly, it has no feeling. It transmits
to you the feelings that you *want*. Like any communication medium, the
body receives and sends the messages that it is given. It has no feeling
for them. All of the feeling with which they are invested is given by
the sender and the receiver. The ego and the Holy Spirit both recognize
this, and both also recognize that here the sender and receiver are the
*same*. The Holy Spirit tells you this with joy. The ego hides it, for
it would keep you unaware of it. Who would send messages of hatred and
attack if he but understood he sends them to *himself*? Who would
accuse, make guilty, and condemn *himself*?

<sup>74</sup> The ego's messages are always sent *away* from you in the belief that
for your message of attack and guilt will someone other than yourself
suffer. And even if you suffer, yet someone else will suffer more. The
great deceiver recognizes that this is not so, but as the “enemy” of
peace, it urges you to send out all your messages of hate and free
*yourself*. And to convince you this is possible, it bids the body
search for pain in attack upon another, calling it pleasure and offering
it to you as freedom *from* attack.

<sup>75</sup> Hear not its madness, and believe not the impossible is true. Forget
not that the ego has dedicated the body to the goal of sin and places in
it all its faith that this can be accomplished. Its sad disciples chant
the body's praise continually, in solemn celebration of the ego's rule.
Not one but must believe that yielding to the attraction of guilt is the
*escape* from pain. Not one but must regard the body as himself, without
which he would die, and yet within which is his death equally
inevitable.

<sup>76</sup> It is not given to the ego's disciples to realize that they have
dedicated *themselves* to death. Freedom is offered them, but they have
not accepted it, and what is offered must also be received to be truly
given. For the Holy Spirit, too, is a communication medium, receiving
from the Father and offering His messages unto the Son. Like the ego,
the Holy Spirit is both the sender and the receiver. For what is sent
through Him *returns* to Him, seeking itself along the way and finding
what it seeks. So does the ego find the death *it* seeks, returning it
to *you*.

## c. The Third Obstacle: The Attraction of Death

<sup>77</sup> To you in whose special relationship the Holy Spirit entered, it is
given to release and be released from the dedication to death. For it
was offered you, and you *accepted*. Yet you must learn still more about
this strange devotion, for it contains the third of the obstacles which
peace must flow across. No one can die unless he chooses death. What
*seems* to be the fear of death is really its *attraction*. Guilt, too,
is feared and fearful. Yet it could have no hold at all except on those
who are attracted to it and seek it out. And so it is with death. Made
by the ego, its dark shadow falls across all living things because the
ego is the “enemy” of life.

<sup>78</sup> And yet a shadow cannot kill. What is a shadow to the living? They
but walk past, and it is gone. But what of those whose dedication it is
*not* to live—the black-draped “sinners,” the ego's mournful chorus,
plodding so heavily away from life, dragging their chains and marching
in the slow procession which honors their grim master, lord of death?
Touch any one of them with the gentle hands of forgiveness and watch the
chains fall away along with yours. See him throw aside the black robe he
was wearing to his funeral and hear him laugh at death. The sentence sin
would lay upon him he can escape through your forgiveness.

<sup>79</sup> This is not arrogance. It is the Will of God. What is impossible to
you who chose His Will as yours? What is death to you? *Your* dedication
is not to death nor to its master. When you accepted the Holy Spirit's
purpose in place of the ego's, you renounced death, exchanging it for
life. We know that an idea leaves not its source. And death is the
result of the thought we call the ego as surely as life is the result of
the Thought of God.

## The Incorruptible Body

<sup>80</sup> From the ego came sin and guilt and death, in opposition to life and
innocence and to the Will of God Himself. Where can such opposition lie
but in the sick minds of the insane, dedicated to madness and set
against the peace of Heaven? One thing is sure—God, Who created neither
sin nor death, wills not that you be bound by them. He knows of neither
sin nor its results. The shrouded figures in the funeral procession
march not in honor of their Creator, Whose Will it is they live. They
are not following it; they are *opposing* it.

<sup>81</sup> And what is the black-draped body they would bury? A body which
*they* dedicated to death, a symbol of corruption, a sacrifice to sin,
offered to sin to feed upon and keep itself alive—a thing condemned,
damned by its maker, and lamented by every mourner who looks upon it as
himself. You who believe you have condemned the Son of God to this *are*
arrogant. But you who would release him are but honoring the Will of his
Creator. The arrogance of sin, the pride of guilt, the sepulcher of
separation—all are part of your unrecognized dedication to death. The
glitter of guilt you laid upon the body would kill it. For what the ego
loves, it kills for its obedience. But what obeys it not, it *cannot*
kill.

<sup>82</sup> You have another dedication which would keep the body incorruptible
and perfect as long as it is useful for your holy purpose. The body no
more dies than it can feel. It does *nothing*. Of itself, it is neither
corruptible nor incorruptible. It *is* nothing. It is the result of a
tiny mad idea of corruption which can be *corrected*. For God has
answered this insane idea with His own, an Answer which left Him not and
therefore brings the Creator to the awareness of every mind which heard
His Answer and *accepted* it.

<sup>83</sup> You who are dedicated to the incorruptible have been given through
your acceptance the power to *release* from corruption. What better way
to teach the first and fundamental principle in a course on miracles
than by showing you the one which seems to be the hardest can be
accomplished first? The body can but serve your purpose. As you look
upon it, so will it seem to be. Death, were it true, would be the final
and complete disruption of communication which is the ego's goal.

<sup>84</sup> Those who fear death see not how often and how loudly they call to it
and bid it come to save them from communication. For death is seen as
safety, the great dark savior from the light of truth, the answer to the
Answer, the silencer of the Voice that speaks for God. Yet the retreat
to death is not the end of conflict. Only *God's* Answer is its end. The
obstacle of your seeming love for death that peace must flow across
seems to be very great. For in it lies hidden all the ego's secrets, all
its strange devices for deception, all its sick ideas and weird
imaginings. Here is the final end of union, the triumph of the ego's
making over creation, the victory of lifelessness on Life Itself.

<sup>85</sup> Under the dusty edge of its distorted world, the ego would lay the
Son of God, slain by its orders, proof in his decay that God Himself is
powerless before the ego's might, unable to protect the life that He
created against the ego's savage wish to kill. My brothers, children of
our Father, this is a *dream* of death. There is no funeral, no dark
altars, no grim commandments nor twisted rituals of condemnation to
which the body leads you. Ask not release of *it*. But free it from the
merciless and unrelenting orders *you* laid upon it and forgive it what
*you* ordered it to do. In its exaltation you commanded it to die, for
only death *could* conquer life. And what but insanity could look upon
the defeat of God and think it real?

<sup>86</sup> The fear of death will go as its appeal is yielded to love's *real*
attraction. The end of sin, which nestles quietly in the safety of your
relationship, protected by your union, ready to grow into a mighty force
for God, is very near. The infancy of salvation is carefully guarded by
love, preserved from every thought that would attack it and quietly made
ready to fulfill the mighty task for which it was given you. Your
newborn purpose is nursed by angels, cherished by the Holy Spirit, and
protected by God Himself. It needs not your protection; *it* is *yours*.
For it is deathless, and within it lies the end of death.

<sup>87</sup> What danger can assail the wholly innocent? What can attack the
guiltless? What fear can enter and disturb the peace of sinlessness?
What has been given you, even in its infancy, is in full communication
with God and you. In its tiny hands, it holds in perfect safety every
miracle you will perform, held out to you. The miracle of life is
ageless, born in time but nourished in eternity. Behold this infant to
whom you gave a resting-place by your forgiveness of each other, and see
in it the Will of God. Here is the babe of Bethlehem reborn. And
everyone who gives him shelter will follow him, not to the cross, but to
the Resurrection and the Life.

<sup>88</sup> When anything seems to you to be a source of fear, when any situation
strikes you with terror and makes your body tremble and the cold sweat
of fear comes over it, remember it is always for *one* reason—the ego
has perceived it as a symbol of fear, a sign of sin and death. Remember
then that neither sign nor symbol should be confused with source, for
they must stand for something *other* than themselves. Their meaning
cannot lie in them but must be sought in what they *represent*. And they
may thus mean everything or nothing, according to the truth or falsity
of the idea which they reflect. Confronted with such seeming uncertainty
of meaning, judge it not. Remember the holy Presence of the One given to
you to be the Source of judgment. Give it to Him to judge for you, and
say:

<sup>89</sup> *Take this from me and look upon it, judging it for me.<br/> 
Let me not see it as a sign of sin and death nor use it for destruction.<br/> 
Teach me how **not** to make of it an obstacle to peace,<br/>  
But let You use it **for** me to facilitate its coming*.

## d. The Fourth Obstacle: The Fear of God

<sup>90</sup> What would you see without the fear of death? What would you feel and
think if death held no attraction for you? Very simply, you would
remember your Father. The Creator of life, the Source of everything that
lives, the Father of the universe and of the universe of universes and
of everything that lies even beyond them would you remember. And as this
memory rises in your mind, peace must still surmount a final obstacle
after which is salvation completed and the Son of God entirely restored
to sanity. For here your world *does* end.

<sup>91</sup> The fourth obstacle to be surmounted hangs like a heavy veil before
the face of Christ. Yet as His face rises beyond it, shining with joy
because He is in His Father's Love, peace will lightly brush the veil
aside and run to meet Him and to join with Him at last. For this dark
veil, which seems to make the face of Christ Himself like to a leper's
and the bright rays of His Father's love which light His face with glory
appear as streams of blood, fades in the blazing light beyond it when
the fear of death is gone.

<sup>92</sup> This is the darkest veil, upheld by the belief in death and protected
by its attraction. The dedication to death and to its sovereignty is but
the solemn vow, the promise made in secret to the ego never to lift this
veil, not to approach it nor even to suspect that it is there. This is
the secret bargain made with the ego to keep what lies beyond the veil
forever blotted out and unremembered. Here is your promise never to
allow union to call you out of separation; the great amnesia in which
the memory of God seems quite forgotten; the cleavage of your Self from
you—*the fear of God*, the final step in your dissociation.

<sup>93</sup> See how the belief in death would seem to “save” you. For if this is
gone, what can you fear but *life*? It is the attraction of death that
makes life seem to be ugly, cruel, and tyrannical. You are no more
afraid of death than of the ego. These are your chosen *friends*. For in
your secret alliance with them, you have agreed never to let the fear of
God be lifted so you could look upon the face of Christ and join Him in
His Father.

<sup>94</sup> Every obstacle that peace must flow across is surmounted in just the
same way; the fear that raised it yields to the love beneath, and so the
fear is gone. And so it is with this. The desire to get rid of peace and
drive the Holy Spirit from you fades in the presence of the quiet
recognition that you love Him. The exaltation of the body is given up in
favor of the Spirit, which you love as you could *never* love the body.
And the appeal of death is lost forever as love's attraction stirs and
calls to you. From beyond each of the obstacles to love, Love Itself has
called, and each has been surmounted by the power of the attraction of
what lies beyond. Your *wanting* fear seemed to be holding them in
place. Yet when you heard the voice of love beyond them, you answered
and they disappeared.

<sup>95</sup> And now you stand in terror before what you swore never to look upon.
Your eyes look down, remembering your promise to your “friends.” The
“loveliness” of sin, the delicate appeal of guilt, the “holy” waxen
image of death, and the fear of vengeance of the ego you swore in blood
not to desert, all rise and bid you not to raise your eyes. For you
realize that if you look on this and *let* the veil be lifted, *they*
will be gone forever. All of your “friends,” your “protectors,” and your
“home” will vanish. Nothing that you remember now will you remember.

<sup>96</sup> It seems to you the world will utterly abandon you if you but raise
your eyes. Yet all that will occur is you will leave the world forever.
This is the reestablishment of *your* will. Look upon it open-eyed and
you will nevermore believe that you are at the mercy of things beyond
you, forces you cannot control, and thoughts that come to you against
your will. It *is* your will to look on this. No mad desire, no trivial
impulse to forget again, no stab of fear, nor the cold sweat of seeming
death can stand against your will. For what attracts you from beyond the
veil is also deep *within* you, unseparated from it and completely one.

## The Lifting of the Veil

<sup>97</sup> Forget not that you came this far *together*. And it was surely not
the ego that led you here. No obstacle to peace can be surmounted
through *its* help. *It* does not open up its secrets and bid you look
on them and go beyond them. *It* would not have you see its weakness and
learn it has no power to keep you from the truth. The Guide Who brought
you here *remains* with you, and when you raise your eyes, you will be
*ready* to look on terror with no fear at all. But first lift up your
eyes and look upon each other in innocence born of complete forgiveness
of each other's illusions and through the eyes of faith, which sees them
not.

<sup>98</sup> No one can look upon the fear of God unterrified unless he has
accepted the Atonement and learned illusions are not real. No one can
stand before this obstacle alone, for he could not have reached thus far
*unless* his brother walked beside him. And no one would dare to look on
it without complete forgiveness of his brother in his heart. Stand you
here a while and tremble not. You will be ready. Let us join together in
a holy instant, here in this place where the purpose *given* in a holy
instant has led you. And let us join in faith that He Who brought us
here together will offer you the innocence you need and that you will
accept it for my love and His.

<sup>99</sup> Nor is it possible to look on this too soon. This is the place to
which everyone must come when he is ready. Once he has found his
brother, he *is* ready. Yet merely to reach the place is not enough. A
journey without a purpose is still meaningless, and even when it is
over, it seems to make no sense. How can you *know* that it is over
unless you realize its purpose *is* accomplished? Here, with the
journey's end before you, you *see* its purpose. And it is here you
choose whether to look upon it or wander on, only to return and make the
choice again.

<sup>100</sup> To look upon the fear of God *does* need some preparation. Only the
sane can look on stark insanity and raving madness with pity and
compassion but not with fear. For only if they share in it does it seem
fearful, and you *do* share in it until you look upon each other with
perfect faith and love and tenderness. Before complete forgiveness, you
still stand unforgiving. You are afraid of God *because* you fear each
other. Those you do not forgive *you fear*. And no one reaches love with
fear beside him.

<sup>101</sup> This brother who stands beside you still seems to be a stranger. You
do not know him, and your interpretation of him is very fearful. And you
attack him still, to keep what seems to be *yourself* unharmed. Yet in
his hands is your salvation. You see his madness, which you hate because
you *share* it. And all the pity and forgiveness that would heal it
gives way to fear. Brothers, you *need* forgiveness of each other, for
you will share in madness or in Heaven together. And you will raise your
eyes in faith together or not at all.

<sup>102</sup> Beside each of you is one who offers you the chalice of Atonement,
for the Holy Spirit is in him. Would you hold his sins against him or
accept his gift to you? Is this giver of salvation your friend or enemy?
Choose which he is, remembering that you will receive of him according
to your choice. He has in him the power to forgive your sins, as you for
him. Neither can give it to himself alone. And yet your savior stands
beside each one. Let him be what he is and seek not to make of love an
enemy.

<sup>103</sup> Behold your Friend, the Christ Who stands beside you. How holy and
how beautiful He is! You thought He sinned because you cast the veil of
sin upon Him to hide His loveliness. Yet still He holds forgiveness out
to you to share His holiness. This “enemy,” this “stranger” still offers
you salvation as His Friend. The “enemies” of Christ, the worshipers of
sin, know not Whom they attack. This is your brother, crucified by sin,
and waiting for release from pain. Would you not offer him forgiveness,
when only he can offer it to *you*? For his redemption, he will give you
yours as surely as God created every living thing and loves it. And he
will give it truly, for it will be both offered and received.

<sup>104</sup> There is no grace of Heaven that you cannot offer to each other and
receive from your most holy Friend. Let him withhold it not, for by
receiving it you offer it to him. \[For he *will* receive of you what
*you* received of him.\] Redemption has been given you to give each
other, and thus receive it. Whom you forgive is free, and what you give
you share. Forgive the sins your brother thinks he has committed and all
the guilt you think you see in him.

<sup>105</sup> Here is the holy place of resurrection to which we come again; to
which we will return until redemption is accomplished and *received*.
Think who your brother is before you would condemn him. And offer thanks
to God that he is holy and has been given the gift of holiness for
*you*. Join him in gladness and remove all trace of guilt from his
disturbed and tortured mind. Help him to lift the heavy burden of sin
you laid upon him and he accepted as his own, and toss it lightly and
with happy laughter away from him. Press it not like thorns against his
brow, nor nail him to it unredeemed and hopeless.

<sup>106</sup> Give each other faith, for faith and hope and mercy are yours to
give. Into the hands that give the gift is given. Look on your brother,
and see in him the gift of God you would receive. It is almost Easter,
the time of resurrection. Let us give redemption to each other and
*share* in it that we may rise as one in resurrection and not separate
in death. Behold the gift of freedom that I gave the Holy Spirit for
*both* of you. And be you free together, as you offer to the Holy Spirit
this same gift. And giving it, receive it of Him in return for what you
gave. He leadeth you and me together that we might meet here in this
holy place and make the same decision.

<sup>107</sup> Free your brother here, as I freed you. Give him the self-same gift,
nor look upon him with condemnation of any kind. See him as guiltless as
I look on you, and overlook the sins he thinks he sees within himself.
Offer each other freedom and complete release from sin here in the
garden of seeming agony and death. So will we prepare together the way
unto the resurrection of God's Son and let him rise again to glad
remembrance of his Father, Who knows no sin, no death, but only life
eternal.

<sup>108</sup> Together we will disappear into the Presence beyond the veil, not to
be lost, but *found*; not to be seen, but *known*. And knowing, nothing
in the plan God has established for salvation will be left undone. This
is the journey's purpose, without which *is* the journey meaningless.
Here is the peace of God, given to you eternally by Him. Here is the
rest and quiet that you seek, the reason for the journey from its
beginning. Heaven is the gift you owe each other, the debt of gratitude
you offer to the Son of God in thanks for what he is and what his Father
created him to be.

<sup>109</sup> Think carefully how you would look upon the giver of this gift, for
as you look on him, so will the gift itself appear to be. As he is seen
as either the giver of guilt or of salvation, so will his offering be
seen and so received. The crucified give pain because they are in pain.
But the redeemed give joy because they have been *healed* of pain.
Everyone gives as he receives, but he must choose what it will *be* that
he receives. And he will recognize his choice by what he gives and what
is given him. Nor is it given anything in hell or Heaven to interfere
with his decision.

<sup>110</sup> You came this far because the journey *was* your choice. And no one
undertakes to do what he believes is meaningless. What you had faith in
still is faithful and watches over you in faith so gentle yet so strong
that it would lift you far *beyond* the veil and place the Son of God
safely within the sure protection of his Father. Here is the only
purpose that gives this world and the long journey through this world
whatever meaning lies in them. Beyond this they *are* meaningless. You
stand together, still without conviction they *have* a purpose. Yet it
is given you to see this purpose in your holy Friend and recognize it is
your own.

