---
chapter: Fifteen
ctitle: The Purpose of Time
title: The End of Sacrifice
ref: Tx.15.XI
---

<sup>101</sup> Fear not to recognize the whole idea of sacrifice as *solely* of
your making. And seek not safety by attempting to protect yourself from
where it is not. Your brothers and your Father have become very fearful
to you. And you would bargain with them for a few special relationships
in which you think you see some scraps of safety. Do not try longer to
keep apart your thoughts and the Thought that has been given you. When
they are brought together and perceived where they *are*, the choice
between them is nothing more than a gentle awakening and as simple as
opening your eyes to daylight when you have no more need of sleep.

<sup>102</sup> The sign of Christmas is a star, a light in darkness. See it not
outside yourself but shining in the Heaven within and accept it as the
sign the time of Christ has come. He comes demanding *nothing*. No
sacrifice of any kind of anyone is asked by Him. In His Presence, the
whole idea of sacrifice loses all meaning. For He is Host to God. And
you need but invite Him in Who is there *already*, by recognizing that
His Host is One, and no thought alien to His Oneness can abide with Him
there. Love must be total to give Him welcome, for the Presence of
Holiness *creates* the holiness which surrounds it. No fear can touch
the host who cradles God in the time of Christ, for the Host is as holy
as the Perfect Innocence which He protects and Whose power protects Him.

<sup>103</sup> This Christmas, give the Holy Spirit *everything* that would hurt
you. *Let* yourself be healed completely that you may join with Him in
healing, and let us celebrate our release together by releasing everyone
with us. Leave nothing behind, for release is total, and when you have
accepted it with me, you will *give* it with me. All pain and sacrifice
and littleness will disappear in our relationship, which is as innocent
as our relationship with our Father, and as powerful. Pain will be
brought to us and disappear in our presence, and without pain there can
*be* no sacrifice. And without sacrifice, there love *must* be.

<sup>104</sup> You who believe that sacrifice *is* love must learn that sacrifice
is *separation* from love. For sacrifice brings guilt as surely as love
brings peace. Guilt is the *condition* of sacrifice, as peace is the
condition for the awareness of your relationship with God. Through guilt
you exclude your Father and your brothers from yourself. Through peace
you invite them back and realize that they are where your invitation
bids them be. What you excluded from yourself seems fearful, for you
endowed it with fear and tried to cast it out though it was part of you.
Who can perceive part of himself as loathsome and live within himself in
peace? And who can try to resolve the perceived conflict of Heaven and
hell in him by casting Heaven out and giving it the attributes of hell
without experiencing himself as incomplete and lonely?

<sup>105</sup> As long as you perceive the body as your reality, so long will you
perceive yourself as lonely and deprived. And so long will you also
perceive yourself as a victim of sacrifice, justified in sacrificing
others. For who could thrust Heaven and its Creator aside *without* a
sense of sacrifice and loss? And who can suffer sacrifice and loss
without attempting to *restore* himself? Yet how could you accomplish
this yourselves when the basis of your attempts is the belief in the
*reality* of the deprivation? For deprivation breeds attack, being the
belief that attack *is* justified. And as long as you would retain the
deprivation, attack becomes salvation, and sacrifice becomes love.

<sup>106</sup> So is it that in all your seeking for love, you seek for sacrifice
and *find* it. Yet you find not love. It is impossible to deny what love
is and still *recognize* it. The meaning of love lies in what you have
cast *outside* yourself, and it has no meaning at all apart from you. It
is what you preferred to *keep* that has no meaning, while all that you
would keep *away* holds all the meaning of the universe and holds the
universe together in its meaning. For unless the universe were joined in
*you*, it would be apart from God, and to be without Him *is* to be
without meaning.

<sup>107</sup> In the holy instant, the condition of love is met, for minds are
joined without the body's interference, and where there is
communication, there is peace. The Prince of Peace was born to
reestablish the condition of love by teaching that communication remains
unbroken, even if the body is destroyed, provided that you see not the
body as the *necessary* means of communication. And if you understand
this lesson, you will realize that to sacrifice the body is to sacrifice
*nothing*, and communication, which *must* be of the mind, cannot be
sacrificed. Where, then, *is* sacrifice?

<sup>108</sup> The lesson I was born to teach and still would teach to all my
brothers is that sacrifice is nowhere and love is everywhere. For
communication embraces *everything*, and in the peace it re-establishes,
love comes of itself. Let no despair darken the joy of Christmas, for
the time of Christ is meaningless apart from joy. Let us join in
celebrating peace by demanding no sacrifice of anyone, for so will you
offer me the love I offer you. What can be more joyous than to perceive
we are deprived of *nothing*? Such is the message of the time of Christ,
which I give you that *you* may give it and return it to the Father, Who
gave it to me. For in the time of Christ, communication is restored, and
He joins us in the celebration of His Son's creation.

<sup>109</sup> God offers thanks to the holy host who would receive Him and let Him
enter and abide where He would be. And by your welcome does He welcome
you into Himself, for what is contained in you who welcome Him is
*returned* to Him. And we but celebrate His Wholeness as we welcome Him
into ourselves. Those who receive the Father are one with Him, being
host to Him Who created them. And by allowing Him to enter, the
remembrance of the Father enters with Him, and with Him they remember
the only relationship they ever had and ever *want* to have.

<sup>110</sup> This is the weekend in which a new year will be born from the time
of Christ. I have perfect faith in you to do all that you would
accomplish. Nothing will be lacking, and you will make complete and
*not* destroy. Say and understand this:

<sup>111</sup> *I give you to the Holy Spirit as part of myself.<br/> I know that
you will be released, unless I want to<br/> use you to imprison
**myself.**<br/> In the name of **my** freedom I will your release,<br/>
Because I recognize that we will be released **together**.*

<sup>112</sup> So will the year begin in joy and freedom. There is much to do, and
we have been long delayed. Accept the holy instant as this year is born
and take your place, so long left unfulfilled, in the Great Awakening.
Make this year different by making it all the *same.* And let *all* your
relationships be made holy *for* you. This is our will. Amen.

