---
chapter: Fifteen
ctitle: The Purpose of Time
title: The Holy Instant and Real Relationships
ref: Tx.15.IX
---

<sup>79</sup> The holy instant does not replace the need for learning, for the Holy
Spirit must not leave you as your Teacher until the holy instant has
extended far beyond time. For a teaching assignment such as His, He must
use everything in this world for your release. He must side with every
sign or token of your willingness to learn of Him what the truth must
be. He is swift to utilize whatever you offer Him on behalf of this. His
concern and care for you are limitless. In the face of your *fear* of
forgiveness, which He perceives as clearly as He knows forgiveness is
*release*, He will teach you to remember that forgiveness is not loss
but your *salvation*. And that in *complete* forgiveness, in which you
recognize that there is nothing to forgive, *you* are absolved
completely.

<sup>80</sup> Hear Him gladly and learn of Him that you have need of no special
relationships at all. You but seek in them what you have thrown away.
And through them you will never learn the value of what you have cast
aside but what you still desire with all your hearts. Let us join
together in making the holy instant all that there is by desiring that
it *be* all that there is. God's Son has such great need of your
willingness to strive for this that you cannot conceive of need so
great. Behold the only need that God and His Son share and will to meet
together. You are not alone in this. The will of your creations calls to
you to share your will with them. Turn, then, in peace from guilt to God
and them.

<sup>81</sup> Relate only with what will *never* leave you and what *you* can never
leave. The loneliness of God's Son is the loneliness of his Father.
Refuse not the awareness of your completion and seek not to restore it
to yourselves. Fear not to give redemption over to your Redeemer's love.
He will not fail you, for He comes from One Who *cannot* fail. Accept
*your* sense of failure as nothing more than a mistake in who you are.
For the holy host of God is beyond failure, and nothing that he wills
can *be* denied. You are forever in a relationship so holy that it calls
to everyone to escape from loneliness and join you in your love. And
where you are must everyone seek and *find* you there.

<sup>82</sup> Think but an instant on this: God gave the Sonship to you to ensure
your perfect creation. This was His gift, for as He withheld Himself not
from you, He withheld not His creation. Nothing that ever was created
but is yours. Your relationships are with the universe. And this
universe, being of God, is far beyond the petty sum of all the separate
bodies *you* perceive. For all its parts are joined in God through
Christ, where they become like to their Father. For Christ knows of no
separation from His Father, Who is His one relationship, in which He
gives as His Father gives to Him.

<sup>83</sup> The Holy Spirit is God's attempt to free you of what He does not
understand. And because of the Source of the attempt, it will *succeed*.
The Holy Spirit asks you to respond as God does, for He would teach you
what *you* do not understand. God would respond to *every* need,
whatever form it takes. And so He has kept this channel open to receive
His communication to you and yours to Him. God does not understand your
problem in communication, for He does not share it with you. It is only
you who believe that it *is* understandable.

<sup>84</sup> The Holy Spirit knows that it is not understandable, and yet He
understands it because you have *made* it. In Him alone lies the
awareness of what God cannot know and what you do not understand. It is
His holy function to accept them both, and by removing every element of
disagreement, to join them into one. He will do this *because* it is His
function. Leave, then, what seems to you to be impossible to Him Who
knows it *must* be possible because it is the Will of God. And let Him
Whose teaching is *only* of God teach you the *only* meaning of
relationships. For God created the only relationship which has meaning,
and that is His relationship with *you*.

<sup>85</sup> As the ego would limit your perception of your brothers to the body,
so would the Holy Spirit release your vision and let you see the Great
Rays shining from them, so unlimited that they reach to God. It is this
shift in vision which is accomplished in the holy instant. Yet it is
needful for you to learn just what this shift entails, so you will
become willing to make it permanent. Given this willingness, it will not
leave you, for it *is* permanent. For once you have accepted it as the
only perception you *want*, it is translated into knowledge by the part
which God Himself plays in the Atonement, for it is the only step in it
He understands. Therefore, in this there will be no delay when you are
ready for it. God is ready *now*, but *you* are not.

<sup>86</sup> Our task is but to continue as fast as possible the necessary process
of looking straight at all the interference and seeing it *exactly* as
it is. For it is impossible to recognize as wholly *without*
gratification what you think you *want*. The body is the symbol of the
ego, as the ego is the symbol of the separation. And both are nothing
more than attempts to limit communication and thereby to make it
impossible. For communication must be unlimited in order to have
meaning, and *deprived* of meaning, it will not satisfy you completely.
Yet it remains the only means by which you can establish real
relationships.

<sup>87</sup> Real relationships *have* no limits, having been established by God.
In the holy instant, where the Great Rays *replace* the body in
awareness, the recognition of relationships without limits is given you.
But to see this, it is necessary to give up every use the ego has for
the body and to accept the fact that the ego has *no* purpose you would
share with it. For the ego would limit everyone to a body for *its*
purposes, and while you think it *has* a purpose, you will choose to
utilize the means by which *it* tries to turn its purpose into
accomplishment. This will never *be* accomplished. Yet you have surely
recognized that the ego, whose goals are altogether unattainable, will
strive for them with all its might and will do so with the strength
which *you* have given it.

<sup>88</sup> It is impossible to divide your strength between Heaven and hell, God
and the ego, and release your power unto creation, which is the only
purpose for which it was given you. Love would *always* give increase.
Limits are demanded by the ego, representing its demands to make little
and ineffectual. Limit your vision of a brother to his body, which you
*will* do as long as you would not release him from it, and you have
denied his gift to *you*. His body *cannot* give it. And seek it not
through *yours*. Yet your minds are *already* continuous, and their
union need only be accepted, and the loneliness in Heaven is gone.

<sup>89</sup> If you would but let the Holy Spirit tell you of the love of God for
you and the need your creations have to be with you forever, you would
experience the attraction of the eternal. No one can hear Him speak of
this and long remain willing to linger here. For it *is* your will to be
in Heaven, where you are complete and quiet in such sure and loving
relationships that *any* limit is impossible. Would you not exchange
your little relationships for this? For the body *is* little and
limited, and only those whom you would see *without* the limits the ego
would impose on them can offer you the gift of freedom.

<sup>90</sup> You have no conception of the limits you have placed on your
perception and no idea of all the loveliness that you could see. But
this you must remember—the attraction of guilt *opposes* the attraction
of God. His attraction for you remains unlimited, but because your
power, being His, is as great as His, you can turn away from love. What
you invest in guilt, you withdraw from God. And your sight grows weak
and dim and limited, for you have attempted to separate the Father from
the Son and limit their communication. Seek not Atonement in *further*
separation. And limit not your vision of God's Son to what *interferes*
with his release and what the Holy Spirit must *undo* to set him free.
For his belief in limits *has* imprisoned him.

<sup>91</sup> When the body ceases to attract you and when you place no value on it
as a means for getting *anything*, then there will be no interference in
communication, and your thoughts will be as free as God's. As you let
the Holy Spirit teach you how to use the body *only* for purposes of
communication and renounce its use for separation and attack which the
ego sees in it, you will learn you have no need of a body at all. In the
holy instant there *are* no bodies, and you experience only the
attraction of God. Accepting it as undivided, you join Him wholly in an
instant. \[For you would place *no* limits on your union *with* Him.\]
The reality of this relationship becomes the only truth that you could
ever *want*. All truth *is* here.

