---
chapter: Fifteen
ctitle: The Purpose of Time
title: The Time of Christ
ref: Tx.15.X
---

<sup>92</sup> It *is* in your power in *time* to delay the perfect union of the
Father and the Son. For in this world, the attraction of guilt *does*
stand between them. Neither time nor season means anything in eternity.
But here it is the Holy Spirit's function to use them both, though not
as the ego uses them. This is the season when you would celebrate my
birth into the world. Yet you know not how to do it. Let the Holy Spirit
teach you, and let me celebrate *your* birth through Him. The only gift
I can accept of you is the gift I *gave* to you. Release *me* as I will
*your* release. The time of Christ we celebrate *together*, for it has
no meaning if we are apart.

<sup>93</sup> The holy instant is truly the time of Christ. For in this liberating
instant, no guilt is laid upon the Son of God, and his unlimited power
is thus restored to him. What other gift can you offer me, when only
this I will to offer *you*? And to see me is to see me in everyone and
offer everyone the gift you offer me. I am as incapable of receiving
sacrifice as God is, and every sacrifice you ask of yourself, you ask of
me. Learn *now* that sacrifice of any kind is nothing but a limitation
imposed on giving. And by this limitation, you have limited acceptance
of the gift I offer *you*.

<sup>94</sup> We who are one *cannot* give separately. When you are willing to
accept *our* relationship as real, guilt will hold *no* attraction for
you. For in our union, you will accept *all* of our brothers. The gift
of union is the only gift that I was born to give. Give it to me, that
*you* may have it. The time of Christ is the time appointed for the gift
of freedom, offered to everyone. And by *your* acceptance of it, you
have *offered* it to everyone. It *is* in your power to make this season
holy, for it is in your power to make the time of Christ be *now*.

<sup>95</sup> It is possible to do this all at once because there is but *one*
shift in perception that is necessary, for you made but *one* mistake.
It seems like many, but it is all the same. For though the ego takes
many forms, it is *always* the same idea. What is not love is *always*
fear and nothing else. It is not necessary to follow fear through all
the circuitous routes by which it burrows underground and hides in
darkness, to emerge in forms quite different from what it is. Yet it
*is* necessary to examine each one as long as you would retain the
*principle* which governs all of them. When you are willing to regard
them not as separate but as different manifestations of the *same* idea,
and one you do not *want*, they go together. The idea is simply this—you
believe that it is possible to be host to the ego or hostage to God.
This is the choice you think you have, and the decision which you
believe that you must make.

<sup>96</sup> You see no other alternatives, for you cannot accept the fact that
sacrifice gets *nothing*. Sacrifice is so essential to your thought
system that salvation *apart* from sacrifice means nothing to you. Your
confusion of sacrifice and love is so profound that you cannot conceive
of love *without* sacrifice. And it is this that you must look
upon—sacrifice is *attack*, not love. If you would accept but this *one*
idea, your fear of love would vanish. Guilt *cannot* last when the idea
of sacrifice has been removed. For if there is sacrifice, as you are
convinced, someone must pay and someone must get. And the only question
which remains to be decided is *how much* is the price for getting
*what*.

<sup>97</sup> As host to the ego, you believe that you can give *all* your guilt
away *whatever* you think and purchase peace. And the payment does not
seem to be *yours*. While it is obvious that the ego *does* demand
payment, it never seems to be demanding it of *you*. For you are
unwilling to recognize that the ego, which you invited, is treacherous
only to those who think they are its host. The ego will never let you
perceive this, since this recognition would make it homeless. For when
this recognition dawns clearly, you will not be deceived by *any* form
the ego takes to protect itself from your sight.

<sup>98</sup> Each form will be recognized as but a cover for the one idea that
hides behind them all—that love demands sacrifice and is therefore
inseparable from attack and fear. And that guilt is the *price* of love,
which must be paid *by* fear. How fearful, then, has God become to you,
and how great a sacrifice do you believe His love demands! For total
love would demand total sacrifice. And so the ego seems to demand less
of you than God, and of the two is judged as the lesser of two evils,
one to be feared a little, but the other to be destroyed. For you see
love as *destructive*, and your only question is who is to be destroyed,
you or another? You seek to answer this question in your special
relationships, in which you are both destroyer and destroyed in part,
but with the idea of being able to be neither completely. And this you
think saves you from God, Whose total love would completely destroy you.

<sup>99</sup> You think that everyone *outside* yourself demands your sacrifice,
but you do not see that *only* you demand sacrifice and *only* of
yourself. Yet the demand of sacrifice is so savage and so fearful that
you *cannot* accept it where it is. But the *real* price of not
accepting this has been so great that you have given God away rather
than look at it. For if God would demand total sacrifice of you, you
thought it safer to project Him outward and *away* from you and not be
host to Him. To Him you ascribed the ego's treachery, inviting it to
take His place to *protect* you from Him. And you do not recognize that
it is what *you* invited in that would destroy you and *does* demand
total sacrifice of you. No partial sacrifice will appease this savage
guest, for it is an invader who but *seems* to offer kindness, but
always to make the sacrifice complete.

<sup>100</sup> You will not succeed in being partial hostage to the ego, for it
keeps no bargains and would leave you nothing. \[Nor can you be partial
*host* to it.\] You will have to choose between *total* freedom and
*total* bondage, for there are no alternatives but these. You have tried
many compromises in the attempt to avoid recognizing the one decision
which must be made. And yet it is the recognition of the decision *just
as it is* that makes the decision so easy! Salvation is simple, being of
God and therefore very easy to understand. Do not try to project it from
you and see it *outside* yourself. In you are both the question and the
answer—the demand for sacrifice and the peace of God.

