---
chapter: Fifteen
ctitle: The Purpose of Time
title: The Holy Instant and Communication
ref: Tx.15.VIII
---

<sup>65</sup> Beyond the poor attraction of the special love relationship and
*always* obscured by it is the powerful attraction of the Father for His
Son. There is no other love that can satisfy you, because there *is* no
other love. This is the *only* love that is fully given and fully
returned. Being complete, it asks nothing. Being wholly pure, everyone
joined in it *has* everything. This is not the basis for *any*
relationship in which the ego enters. For every relationship on which
the ego embarks *is* special. The ego establishes relationships only to
*get* something. And it would keep the giver bound to itself through
guilt.

<sup>66</sup> It is impossible for the ego to enter into any relationship without
anger, for the ego believes that anger makes *friends.* This is not its
statement, but it *is* its purpose. For the ego really *believes* that
it can get and keep *by making guilty*. This is its *one* attraction; an
attraction so weak that it would have no hold at all, except that no one
*recognizes* it. For the ego always *seems* to attract through love and
has no attraction at all to anyone who perceives that it attracts
through *guilt.*

<sup>67</sup> The sick attraction of guilt must be recognized for what it *is*. For
having been made real to you, it is essential to look at it clearly, and
by withdrawing your *investment* in it, to learn to let it go. No one
would choose to let go what he believes has value. Yet the attraction of
guilt has value to you only because you have *not* looked at what it is
and have judged it completely in the dark. As we bring it to light, your
only question will be why it was you *ever* wanted it. You have nothing
to lose by looking open-eyed at this, for ugliness such as this belongs
not in your holy mind. The host of God *can* have no real investment
here.

<sup>68</sup> We said before that the ego attempts to maintain and increase guilt,
but in such a way that you do not recognize what it would do to *you*.
For it is the ego's fundamental doctrine that what you do to others,
*you have escaped.* The ego wishes *no one* well. Yet its survival
depends on your belief that *you* are exempt from its evil intentions.
It counsels, therefore, that if you are host to *it*, it will enable you
to direct the anger that it holds outward, thus *protecting* you. And
thus it embarks on an endless, unrewarding chain of special
relationships, forged out of anger and dedicated to but one insane
belief—that the more anger you invest *outside* yourself, the safer
*you* become.

<sup>69</sup> It is this chain that binds the Son of God to guilt, and it is this
chain the Holy Spirit would remove from his holy mind. For the chain of
savagery belongs not around the chosen host of God, who *cannot* make
himself host to the ego. In the name of his release, and in the name of
Him Who would release him, let us look more closely at the relationships
which the ego contrives and let the Holy Spirit judge them truly. For it
is certain that, if you will *look* at them, you will offer them gladly
to Him. What *He* can make of them, you do not know, but you will become
willing to find out if you are willing, first, to perceive what *you*
have made of them.

<sup>70</sup> In one way or another, every relationship which the ego makes is
based on the idea that by *sacrificing* itself, it becomes *bigger*. The
“sacrifice,” which it regards as purification, is actually the root of
its bitter resentment. For it would much prefer to attack directly and
avoid delaying what it *really* wants. Yet the ego acknowledges
“reality” as it sees it and recognizes that no one could interpret
*direct* attack as love. Yet to make guilty *is* direct attack but does
not *seem* to be. For the guilty *expect* attack, and having *asked* for
it, they are *attracted* to it.

<sup>71</sup> In these insane relationships, the attraction of what you do not want
seems to be much stronger than the attraction of what you *do.* For each
one thinks that he has sacrificed something to the other and *hates* him
for it. Yet this is what he thinks he *wants*. He is not in love with
the other at all. He merely believes he is in love with *sacrifice.* And
for this sacrifice, which he demanded of *himself*, he demands the
*other* accept the guilt and sacrifice himself as well. Forgiveness
becomes impossible, for the ego believes that to forgive another is to
*lose* him. For it is only by attack *without* forgiveness that the ego
can ensure the guilt which holds all its relationships together.

<sup>72</sup> Yet they only *seem* to be together. For relationships, to the ego,
mean only that *bodies* are together. It is always physical closeness
that the ego demands, and it does not object where the *mind* goes or
what *it* thinks, for this seems unimportant. As long as the body is
there to receive its sacrifice, it is content. To the ego, the mind is
private, and only the *body* can be shared. Ideas are basically of no
concern, except as they draw the body of another closer or farther. And
it is in these terms that it evaluates ideas as good or bad. What makes
another guilty and *holds* him through guilt is “good.” What *releases*
him from guilt is “bad,” because he would no longer believe that bodies
communicate, and so he would be “gone.”

<sup>73</sup> Suffering and sacrifice are the gifts with which the ego would
“bless” all unions. And those who are united at its altar *accept*
suffering and sacrifice as the price of union. In their angry alliances,
born of the fear of loneliness and yet dedicated to the *continuance* of
loneliness, they seek relief from guilt by increasing it in the *other*.
For they believe that this decreases it in *them*. The other seems
always to be attacking and wounding them, perhaps in little ways,
perhaps “unconsciously,” yet never without demand of sacrifice. The fury
of those joined at the ego's altar far exceeds your awareness of it. For
what the ego *really* wants, you do not realize.

<sup>74</sup> Whenever you are angry, you can be sure that you have formed a
special relationship which the ego has “blessed,” for anger *is* its
blessing. Anger takes many forms, but it cannot long deceive those who
will learn that love brings no guilt at all, and what brings guilt
cannot be love and *must* be anger. *All* anger is nothing more than an
attempt to make someone feel guilty, and this attempt is the *only*
basis which the ego accepts for special relationships. Guilt is the only
need the ego has, and as long as you identify with it, guilt will
*remain* attractive to you.

<sup>75</sup> Yet remember this—to be with a body is *not* communication. And if
you think it is, you will feel guilty about communication and will be
*afraid* to hear the Holy Spirit, recognizing in His voice your *own*
need to communicate. The Holy Spirit *cannot* teach through fear. And
how can He communicate with you while you believe that to communicate is
to make yourself *alone*? It is clearly insane to believe that by
communicating you will be abandoned. And yet you *do* believe it. For
you think that your minds must be kept private or you will *lose* them,
and if your *bodies* are together your minds remain your own. The union
of bodies thus becomes the way in which you would keep *minds* apart.
For bodies cannot forgive. They can only do as the mind directs.

<sup>76</sup> The illusion of the autonomy of the body and *its* ability to
overcome loneliness is but the working of the ego's plan to establish
its *own* autonomy. As long as you believe that to be with a body is
companionship, you will be compelled to attempt to keep your brother in
his body, held there by guilt. And you will see *safety* in guilt and
*danger* in communication. For the ego will *always* teach that
loneliness is solved by guilt and that communication is the *cause* of
loneliness. And despite the evident insanity of this lesson, you have
*learned* it.

<sup>77</sup> Forgiveness lies in communication as surely as damnation lies in
guilt. It is the Holy Spirit's teaching function to instruct those who
believe that communication is damnation that communication is
*salvation*. And He will do so, for the power of God in Him *and* you is
joined in *real* relationship, so holy and so strong that it can
overcome even *this* without fear. It is through the holy instant that
what seems impossible is *accomplished*, making it evident that it is
*not* impossible. In the holy instant, guilt holds *no* attraction,
since communication has been restored. And guilt, whose *only* purpose
is to disrupt communication, has no function here.

<sup>78</sup> Here there is no concealment and no private thoughts. The willingness
to communicate attracts communication *to* it and overcomes loneliness
completely. There is complete forgiveness here, for there is no desire
to exclude anyone from your completion in sudden recognition of the
value of his part in it. In the protection of *your* wholeness, all are
invited and made welcome. And you understand that your completion is
God's, Whose only need is to have *you* be complete. For your completion
makes you His in your awareness. And here it is that you experience
yourself as you were created and as you *are*.

