---
chapter: Fifteen
ctitle: The Purpose of Time
title: The Holy Instant and Special Relationships
ref: Tx.15.VI
---

<sup>45</sup> The holy instant is the Holy Spirit's most useful learning device for
teaching you love's meaning. For its purpose is to suspend judgment
*entirely.* Judgment always rests on the past, for past experience is
the basis on which you judge. Judgment becomes impossible without the
past, for without it you do not understand anything. You would make no
attempt to judge because it would be quite apparent to you that you do
not know what anything *means.* You are afraid of this because you
believe that *without* the ego all would be chaos. Yet I assure you that
without the ego all would be *love*.

<sup>46</sup> The past is the *ego's* chief learning device, for it is in the past
that you learned to define your own needs and acquired methods for
meeting them on your own terms. We said before that to limit love to
*part* of the Sonship is to bring guilt into your relationships and thus
make them unreal. If you seek to separate out certain aspects of the
totality and look to them to meet your imagined needs, you are
attempting to use separation to *save* you. How, then, could guilt *not*
enter? For separation *is* the source of guilt, and to appeal to it for
salvation is to believe you are alone. To be alone *is* to be guilty.
For to experience yourself as alone is to deny the oneness of the Father
and his Son and thus to attack reality.

<sup>47</sup> You cannot love parts of reality and understand what love means. If
you would love unlike to God, Who *knows* no special love, how *can* you
understand it? To believe that *special* relationships, with *special*
love, can offer you salvation is the belief that separation *is*
salvation. For it is the complete *equality* of the Atonement in which
salvation lies. How can you decide that special aspects of the Sonship
can give you more than others? The *past* has taught you this. Yet the
holy instant teaches you it *is* not so.

<sup>48</sup> Because of guilt, *all* special relationships have some elements of
fear in them. And this is why they shift and change so frequently. They
are not based on changeless love alone. And love where fear has entered
cannot be depended on because it is not perfect. In His function as
Interpreter of what you have made, the Holy Spirit *uses* special
relationships, which *you* have chosen to support the ego, as a learning
experience which points to truth. Under His teaching, *every*
relationship becomes a lesson in love.

<sup>49</sup> The Holy Spirit knows no one is special. Yet He also perceives that
you have *made* special relationships, which He would purify and not let
you destroy. However unholy the reason why you made them may be, He can
translate them into holiness by removing as much fear as you will let
Him. You can place any relationship under His care and be sure that it
will not result in pain if you offer Him your willingness to have it
serve no need but His. All the guilt in it arises from *your* use of it.
All the love from His. Do not, then, be afraid to let go your imagined
needs, which would destroy the relationship. Your *only* need is His.

<sup>50</sup> Any relationship which you would substitute for another has not been
offered to the Holy Spirit for His use. There *is* no substitute for
love. If you would attempt to substitute one aspect of love for another,
you have placed *less* value on one and *more* on the other. You have
not only *separated* them, but you have also judged against *both*. Yet
you had judged against yourself first, or you would never have imagined
that you needed them as they were not. Unless you had seen yourself as
*without* love, you could not have judged them so like you in lack.

<sup>51</sup> The ego's use of relationships is so fragmented that it frequently
goes even further—one part of one aspect suits its purposes, while it
prefers different parts of another aspect. Thus does it assemble reality
to its own capricious liking, offering for your seeking a picture whose
likeness does not exist. For there is nothing in Heaven or earth that it
resembles, and so however much you seek for its reality, you cannot find
it because it is not real.

<sup>52</sup> Everyone on earth has formed special relationships, and although this
is not so in Heaven, the Holy Spirit knows how to bring a touch of
Heaven to them here. In the holy instant no one is special, for your
personal needs intrude on no one to make them different. Without the
values from the past, you *would* see them all the same and like
*yourself*. Nor would you see any separation between yourself and them.
In the holy instant, you see in each relationship what it *will* be when
you perceive only the present.

<sup>53</sup> God knows you *now*. He remembers nothing, having *always* known you
exactly as He knows you now. The holy instant parallels His knowing by
bringing *all* perception out of the past, thus removing the frame of
reference you have built by which to judge your brothers. Once this is
gone, the Holy Spirit substitutes His frame of reference for it. His
frame of reference is simply God. The Holy Spirit's timelessness lies
only here. For in the holy instant, free of the past, you see that love
is in you, and you have no need to look *without* and snatch it guiltily
from where you thought it was.

<sup>54</sup> *All* your relationships are blessed in the holy instant because the
blessing is not limited. In the holy instant, the Sonship gains *as
one*. And united in your blessing, it *becomes* one to you. The meaning
of love is the meaning God gave to it. Give to it any meaning *apart*
from His, and it is impossible to understand it. Every brother God loves
as He loves you—neither less nor more. He needs them all equally, and so
do *you.* In time you have been told to offer miracles as Christ directs
and let the Holy Spirit bring to you those who are seeking you. Yet in
the holy instant, you unite directly with God, and *all* your brothers
join in Christ. Those who are joined in Christ are in no way separate.
For Christ is the Self the Sonship shares, as God shares His Self with
Christ.

<sup>55</sup> Think you that you can judge the Self of God? God has created it
*beyond* judgment out of His need to extend His Love. With love in you,
you have no need *except* to extend it. In the holy instant, there is no
conflict of needs, for there is only *one*. For the holy instant reaches
to eternity and to the Mind of God. And it is only there love *has*
meaning, and only there *can* it be understood.

<sup>56</sup> It is impossible to use one relationship at the expense of another
and *not* suffer guilt. And it is equally impossible to condemn part of
a relationship and find peace *within* it. Under the Holy Spirit's
teaching, *all* relationships are seen as total commitments, yet they do
not conflict with one another in any way. Perfect faith in each one for
its ability to satisfy you *completely* arises only from perfect faith
in *yourself*. And this you cannot have while guilt remains. And there
*will* be guilt as long as you accept the possibility, and *cherish* it,
that you can make a brother what he is not because *you* would have him
so.

<sup>57</sup> You have so little faith in yourself because you are unwilling to
accept the fact that perfect love is in *you*. And so you seek without
for what you cannot *find* without. I offer you my perfect faith in you
in place of all your doubt. But forget not that my faith must be as
perfect in all your brothers as it is in you, or it would be a limited
gift to *you.* In the holy instant, we share our faith in God's Son
because we recognize together that he is wholly worthy of it, and in our
appreciation of his worth, we *cannot* doubt his holiness. And so we
love him.

