---
chapter: Fifteen
ctitle: The Purpose of Time
title: The Holy Instant and the Laws of God
ref: Tx.15.VII
---

<sup>58</sup> All separation vanishes as holiness is shared. For holiness is power,
and by sharing it, it *gains* in strength. If you seek for satisfaction
in gratifying your needs as *you* perceive them, you must believe that
strength comes from another, and what *you* gain *he loses*. Someone
must *always* lose if you perceive yourself as weak. Yet there is
another interpretation of relationships which transcends the concept of
loss of power completely.

<sup>59</sup> You do not find it difficult to believe that, when another calls on
God for love, *your* call remains as strong. Nor do you think that, by
God's answer to him, *your* hope of answer is diminished. On the
contrary, you are far more inclined to regard his success as witness to
the possibility of *yours*. That is because you recognize, however
dimly, that God is an *idea*, and so your faith in Him is *strengthened*
by sharing. What you find difficult to accept is the fact that, like
your Father, *you* are an idea. And like Him, you can give yourself
completely, *wholly* without loss, and *only* with gain.

<sup>60</sup> Herein lies peace, for here there *is* no conflict. In the world of
scarcity, love has no meaning, and peace is impossible. For gain and
loss are *both* accepted, and so no one is aware that perfect love is in
him. In the holy instant, you recognize the *idea* of love in you and
unite this idea with the mind that thought it and could not *relinquish*
it. By holding it within itself, there *was* no loss. The holy instant
thus becomes a lesson in how to hold all of your brothers in your mind,
experiencing not loss, but *completion*. From this it follows you can
*only* give. And this *is* love, for this alone is natural under the
laws of God.

<sup>61</sup> In the holy instant, the laws of God prevail, and only they have
meaning. The laws of this world cease to hold any meaning at all. When
the Son of God accepts the laws of God as what he gladly wills, it is
impossible that he be bound or limited in any way. In this instant, he
is as free as God would have him be. For the instant he *refuses* to be
bound, he is *not* bound.

<sup>62</sup> In the holy instant, nothing happens that has not always been. Only
the veil that has been drawn *across* reality is lifted. Nothing has
changed. Yet the *awareness* of changelessness comes swiftly as the veil
of time is pushed aside. No one who has not yet experienced the lifting
of the veil and felt himself drawn irresistibly into the light behind it
can have faith in love *without* fear. Yet the Holy Spirit *gives* you
this faith because He offered it to me and I *accepted* it. Fear not the
holy instant will be denied you, for I denied it not. And through me the
Holy Spirit gave it unto you, as *you* will give it. Let no need that
you perceive obscure your need of this. For in the holy instant, you
will recognize the only need the aspects of the Son of God share
equally, and by this recognition you will join with me in *offering*
what is needed.

<sup>63</sup> It is through *us* that peace will come. Join me in the *idea* of
peace, for in ideas minds *can* communicate. If you would give
*yourself* as your Father gives His Self, you will learn to understand
Selfhood. And therein is love's meaning understood. But remember that
understanding is of the *mind* and *only* of the mind. Knowledge is
therefore of the mind, and its conditions are in the mind with it. If
you were not only an idea and *nothing else*, you could not be in full
communication with all that ever was. Yet as long as you *prefer* to be
something else, or would attempt to be nothing else and something else
*together*, the language of communication, which you know perfectly, you
will not remember.

<sup>64</sup> In the holy instant God is remembered, and the language of
communication with all your brothers is remembered with Him. For
communication is remembered *together*, as is truth. There is no
exclusion in the holy instant because the past is gone and with it goes
the whole *basis* for exclusion. Without its source, exclusion vanishes.
And this permits *your* Source and that of all your brothers to replace
it in your awareness. God and the power of God will take their rightful
place in you, and you will experience the full communication of ideas
with ideas. Through your ability to do this, you will learn what you
*must* be, for you will begin to understand what your Creator is and
what His creation is along with Him.

