---
chapter: Five
ctitle: Healing and Wholeness
title: Time and Eternity
ref: Tx.5.VIII
---

<sup>70</sup> The *continuing* will to remain separated is the only possible reason
for continuing guilt feelings. We have said this before, but we did not
emphasize the destructive results of this decision at that time. *Any*
decision of the mind will affect both behavior *and* experience. What
you will, you *expect*. This is not delusional. Your mind *does* create
your future, and it can turn it back to full creation at any minute *if
it accepts the Atonement first*. It will also turn back to full creation
the instant it has done so. Having given up its thought disorder, the
proper ordering of thought becomes quite apparent.

<sup>71</sup> God in His knowledge is not waiting, but His Kingdom is bereft while
*you* wait. All the Sons of God are waiting for your return, just as
*you* are waiting for *theirs*. Delay does not matter in eternity, but
it *is* tragic in time. You have elected to be in time rather than
eternity and have therefore changed your belief in your status. Yet your
election is both free and alterable. You do not belong in time. Your
place is *only* in eternity, where God Himself placed you forever.

<sup>72</sup> Guilt feelings are the *preservers* of time. They induce fears of
future retaliation or abandonment and thus ensure that the future will
remain like the past. This is the ego's continuity and gives it a false
sense of security through the belief that you cannot escape from it. But
you can and *must*. God offers you the continuity of eternity in
exchange. When you choose to make this exchange, you will simultaneously
exchange guilt for joy, viciousness for love, and pain for peace. My
role is only to unchain your will and make it free. Your ego cannot
accept this freedom and will oppose your free decision at every possible
moment and in every possible way. And as its maker, you recognize what
it can do because you *gave* it the power to do it.

<sup>73</sup> The mind does indeed know its power, because the mind does indeed
know God. Remember the Kingdom always, and remember that you who are
part of the Kingdom *cannot* be lost. The mind that was in me *is* in
you, for God creates with perfect fairness. Let the Holy Spirit remind
you always of His fairness, and let me teach you how to share it with
your brothers. How else can the chance to claim it for yourself be given
you? What you do not understand is that the two voices speak for
different interpretations of the same thing simultaneously, or almost
simultaneously, for the ego always speaks first. Alternate
interpretations were unnecessary until the first one was made, and
speaking itself was unnecessary before the ego was made.

<sup>74</sup> The ego speaks in judgment and the Holy Spirit reverses its
decisions, much as the Supreme Court has the power to reverse the lower
courts' decisions about the laws of this world. The ego's decisions are
*always* wrong, because they are based on a complete fallacy which they
were made to uphold. *Nothing* the ego perceives is interpreted
correctly. Not only does it cite Scripture for its purpose, but it even
interprets Scripture as a witness for itself. The Bible is a fearful
thing to the ego because of its prejudiced judgment. Perceiving it as
fearful, it interprets it fearfully. Having made *you* afraid, you do
not appeal to the Higher Court, because you believe its judgment would
be *against* you.

<sup>75</sup> We need cite only a few examples to see how the ego's interpretations
have misled you. A favorite ego quotation is “As ye sow, so shall ye
reap.” Another is “Vengeance is mine, sayeth the Lord.” Still another is
“I will visit the sins of the father unto the third and fourth
generation,” and also “The wicked shall perish.” There are many others,
but if you will let the Holy Spirit reinterpret these in His own light,
they will suffice.

<sup>76</sup> “As ye sow, so shall ye reap” merely means that what you believe to
be worth cultivating you will cultivate in yourself. Your judgment of
what is worthy *makes* it worthy for you. “Vengeance is mine, sayeth the
Lord” is easily explained if you remember that ideas increase only by
being shared. This quotation therefore emphasizes the fact that
vengeance *cannot* be shared. Give it therefore to the Holy Spirit, who
will undo it in you because it does not belong in your mind, which is
part of God.

<sup>77</sup> “I will visit the sins of the fathers unto the third and fourth
generation,” as interpreted by the ego, is particularly vicious. It is
used, in fact, as an attempt to guarantee its survival beyond itself.
Actually, all the quotation means is that the Holy Spirit in later
generations retains the power to interpret *correctly* what former
generations have thought and thus release *their* thoughts from the
ability to produce fear anywhere in the Sonship. “The wicked shall
perish” is merely a statement of fact if the word “perish” is properly
understood. Every loveless thought *must* be undone. Even the word
“undone” is fearful to the ego, which interprets “I am undone” as “I am
destroyed.”

<sup>78</sup> The ego will *not* be destroyed because it is part of your thought,
but because it is uncreative and therefore unsharing, it *will* be
reinterpreted entirely to release you from fear. The part of your
thought which you have given to the ego will merely return to the
Kingdom, where your whole mind *belongs*. The ego is a form of arrest,
but arrest is merely delay. It does *not* involve the concept of
punishment, although the ego welcomes that interpretation. You *can*
delay the completion of the Kingdom, but you *cannot* introduce the
concept of assault into it.

<sup>79</sup> When I said, “I am come as a light into the world,” I surely came to
share the light with you. Remember the symbolic reference we made before
to the ego's dark glass, and remember also that we said, “Do not look
there.” It is still true that “where you look to find yourself is up to
you.” The Higher Court will *not* condemn you. It will merely dismiss
the case against you. There can *be* no case against a Child of God, and
every witness to guilt in God's creations is bearing false witness to
God Himself.

<sup>80</sup> Appeal everything you believe gladly to God's own Higher Court,
because it speaks for Him and therefore speaks truly. It will dismiss
the case against you, however carefully *you* have built it. The case
may be foolproof, but it is *not* God-proof. The Voice for God will not
hear it at all because He can only witness truly. His verdict will
always be “Thine is the Kingdom” because He was *given* you to remind
you of what you are.

<sup>81</sup> Your patience with each other is your patience with yourselves. Is
not a Child of God *worth* patience? I have shown you infinite patience
because my will *is* that of our Father, from Whom I learned of infinite
patience. His Voice was in me as it is in you, speaking for patience
towards the Sonship in the name of its Creator. What you need to learn
now is that only infinite patience *can* produce immediate effects. This
is the way in which time is exchanged for eternity. Infinite patience
calls upon infinite love, and by producing results *now*, it renders
time unnecessary.

<sup>82</sup> To say that time is temporary is merely redundant. We have repeatedly
said that time is a learning device which will be abolished when it is
no longer useful. The Holy Spirit, Who speaks for God in time, also
knows that time is meaningless. He reminds you of this in every passing
moment of time, because it is His special function to return you to
eternity and remain to bless *your* creations there. He is the only
blessing you can truly give, because He is so truly blessed, and because
He has been given you so freely by God, you must give Him as you
received Him.

