---
chapter: Five
ctitle: Healing and Wholeness
title: The Two Decisions
ref: Tx.5.VII
---

<sup>59</sup> Perhaps some of our concepts will become clearer and more personally
meaningful if the ego's use of guilt is clarified. The ego has a
purpose, just as the Holy Spirit has. The ego's purpose is *fear*
because *only* the fearful can *be* egotistic. The ego's logic is as
impeccable as that of the Holy Spirit, because your mind has all the
means at its disposal to side with Heaven or earth, as it elects. But
again, let us remember that both are in *you*. In Heaven there is no
guilt, because the Kingdom is attained through the Atonement, which
releases you to create. The word “create” is appropriate here because,
once what *you* have made is undone by the Holy Spirit, the blessed
residue is restored and therefore continues in creation.

<sup>60</sup> What is truly blessed is incapable of giving rise to guilt and *must*
give rise to joy. This makes it invulnerable to the ego because its
peace is unassailable. It is invulnerable to disruption *because* it is
whole. Guilt is *always* disruptive. Anything that engenders fear is
divisive because it obeys the law of division. If the ego is the symbol
of the separation, it is also the symbol of guilt. Guilt is more than
merely not of God. It is the symbol of the *attack* on God. This is a
totally meaningless concept *except* to the ego, but do not
underestimate the power of the ego's belief in it. This is the belief
from which *all* guilt really stems.

<sup>61</sup> The ego *is* the part of the mind which believes in division. How can
part of God detach itself *without* believing it is attacking Him? We
spoke before of the authority problem as involving the concept of
*usurping* God's power. The ego believes that this is what *you* did
because it believes it *is* you. It follows, then, that if you identify
*with* the ego, you *must* perceive yourself as guilty. Whenever you
respond to your ego, you *will* experience guilt and you *will* fear
punishment. The ego is quite literally a fearful thought.

<sup>62</sup> However ridiculous the idea of attacking God may be to the *sane*
mind, never forget that the ego is *not* sane. It represents a
delusional system, and it speaks *for* it. Listening to the ego's voice
*means* that you believe it is possible to attack God. You believe that
a part of Him has been torn away by *you*. The classic picture of fear
of retaliation *from without* then follows because the severity of the
guilt is so acute that it *must* be projected. Although Freud was wrong
about the basic conflict itself, he was very accurate in describing its
effects.

<sup>63</sup> Whatever you accept *into* your mind has reality for you. It is,
however, only your *acceptance* of it that makes it real. If you
enthrone the ego in it, the fact that you have accepted it or allowed it
to enter *makes* it your reality. This is because the mind, as God
created it, *is* capable of creating reality. We said before that you
must learn to think *with* God. To think with Him is to think *like*
Him. This engenders joy, not guilt, because it is natural. Guilt is a
sure sign that your thinking is *un*natural. Perverted thinking will
*always* be attended with guilt because it *is* the belief in sin.

<sup>64</sup> The ego does not perceive sin as a lack of love. It perceives sin as
a *positive act of assault*. This is an interpretation which is
necessary to the ego's survival, because as soon as you regard sin as a
*lack* you will automatically attempt to remedy the situation. And you
will succeed. The ego regards this as doom, but *you* must learn to
regard it as freedom. The guiltless mind *cannot* suffer. Being sane, it
heals the body because *it* has been healed. The sane mind cannot
conceive of illness, because it cannot conceive of attacking anyone or
anything.

<sup>65</sup> We said before that illness is a form of magic. It might be better to
say that it is a form of magical solution. The ego believes that by
punishing *itself* it will mitigate the punishment of God. Yet even in
this it is arrogant. It attributes to God a punishing intent, and then
takes over this intent as its *own* prerogative. It tries to usurp *all*
the functions of God as it perceives them, because it recognizes that
only total allegiance can be trusted.

<sup>66</sup> The ego cannot *oppose* the laws of God any more than *you* can, but
it can *interpret* them according to what it wants, just as *you* can.
That is why the question, “What *do* you want?” must be answered. You
*are* answering it every minute and every second, and each moment of
decision is a judgment which is anything *but* ineffectual. Its effects
will follow automatically *until the decision is changed*. This is
repeated here because you have not learned it. But again, your decision
can be *unmade* as well as made. Remember, though, that the
*alternatives* are unalterable.

<sup>67</sup> The Holy Spirit, like the ego, is a decision. Together they
constitute all the alternatives which the mind can accept and obey. The
ego and the Holy Spirit are the *only* choices open to you. God created
one, and so you *cannot* eradicate it. *You* made the other, and so you
*can*. *Only* what God creates is irreversible and unchangeable. What
*you* have made can always be changed, because when you do not think
*like* God you are not really thinking at all. Delusional ideas are not
real thoughts, although you *can* believe in them. But you are wrong.
The function of thought comes *from* God and is *in* God. As part of His
Thought, you cannot think *apart* from Him.

<sup>68</sup> Irrational thought is a thought *disorder*. God Himself orders your
thought because your thought was created *by* Him. Guilt feelings are
always a sign that you do not know this. They also show that you believe
you can think apart from God *and want to*. Every thought disorder is
attended by guilt at its inception and maintained by guilt in its
continuance. Guilt is inescapable for those who believe they order their
own thought and must therefore obey its orders. This makes them feel
*responsible* for their mind errors, without recognizing that by
*accepting* this responsibility they are really reacting irresponsibly.
If the *sole* responsibility of the miracle worker is to accept the
Atonement for himself, and I assure you that it is, then the
responsibility for what is atoned *for* cannot *be* yours.

<sup>69</sup> The dilemma cannot be resolved except by accepting the solution of
*undoing*. You *would* be responsible for the effects of all your wrong
thinking if it could not be undone. The purpose of the Atonement is to
save the past in purified form only. If you accept the remedy for a
thought disorder, and a remedy whose efficacy is beyond doubt, how can
its symptoms remain? You have reason to question the validity of symptom
cure, but *no one* believes that the symptoms can remain if the
underlying *cause* is removed.

