---
chapter: Five
ctitle: Healing and Wholeness
title: The Eternal Fixation
ref: Tx.5.IX
---

<sup>83</sup> The idea of “set” is among the better psychological concepts.
Actually, it is used quite frequently in the Bible and also in this
course under many different terms. For example, “God will keep him in
perfect peace whose mind is stayed (or set) on Him,” a statement which
means that God's peace is set in the Holy Spirit because it is fixed on
God. It is also fixed in you. You, then, *are* fixed in the peace of
God. The concept of “fixation” is also a very helpful one which Freud
understood perfectly. Unfortunately, he lost his understanding because
he was afraid and, as you know all too well, fear is incompatible with
good judgment. Fear distorts thinking and therefore *dis*orders thought.

<sup>84</sup> Freud's system of thought was extremely ingenious because Freud was
extremely ingenious, and a mind *must* endow its thoughts with its own
attributes. This is its inherent strength, although it may misuse its
power. Freud lost much of the potential value of his thought system,
because he did *not* include himself in it. This is a dissociated state,
because the thinker cuts himself off from his thoughts. Freud's thought
was so conflicted that he could not have retained his sanity as *he* saw
it *without* dissociation. That is why the many contradictions which are
quite apparent in his thinking became increasingly less apparent to
*him*. A man who knows what fixation really means and yet does not yield
to it is terribly afraid.

<sup>85</sup> Fixation is the pull of God, on whom your mind *is* fixed because of
the Holy Spirit's irrevocable set. “Irrevocable” means “cannot be called
back or redirected.” The irrevocable nature of the Holy Spirit's set is
the basis for His unequivocal Voice. The Holy Spirit *never* changes His
Mind. Clarity of thought *cannot* occur under conditions of vacillation.
Unless a mind is fixed in its purpose, it is *not* clear. Clarity
literally means the state of light, and enlightenment *is*
understanding. Enlightenment stands *under* perception, because you have
denied it as the *real* foundation of thought. This is the basis for
*all* delusional systems.

<sup>86</sup> The concept of fixation as Freud saw it has a number of learning
advantages. First, it recognizes that man can be fixated at a point in
development which does *not* accord with a point in time. This clearly
could have been a means toward real release from the time belief, had
Freud pursued it with an open mind. Freud, however, suffered all his
life from refusal to allow eternity to dawn upon his mind and enlighten
it truly. As a result, he overlooked *now* entirely and merely saw the
continuity of past and future.

<sup>87</sup> Second, although Freud misinterpreted what the Holy Spirit told him,
or better, reminded him of, he was too honest to deny more than was
necessary to keep his fear in tolerable bounds as he perceived the
situation. Therefore, he emphasized that the point in development at
which the mind is fixated is more real to *itself* than the external
reality with which it disagrees. This again could have been a powerful
*release* mechanism had Freud not decided to involve it in a strong
*defense* system because he perceived it as an attack.

<sup>88</sup> Third, although Freud interpreted fixation as involving irrevocable
“danger points” to which the mind could always regress, the concept can
also be interpreted as an irrevocable call to sanity which the mind
cannot *lose*. Freud himself could not accept this interpretation, but
throughout his thought system, the “threat” of fixation remained and
could never be eliminated by any living human being. Essentially, this
was the basis of Freud's pessimism, personally as well as theoretically.
He tried every means his very inventive mind could devise to set up a
form of therapy which could enable the mind to escape from fixation
forever, even though he *knew* this was impossible.

<sup>89</sup> This knowledge plagued Freud's belief in his own thought system at
every turn because he was both an honest man and a healer. He was
therefore only partially insane and was unable to relinquish the *hope*
of release even though he could not cope with it. The reason for this
amount of detail is because *you* are in the same position. You were
eternally fixated on God in your creation, and the pull of this fixation
is so strong that you will never overcome it. The reason is perfectly
clear. The fixation is on a level so high that it cannot *be*
surmounted. You are *always* being pulled back to your Creator, because
you *belong* to Him.

<sup>90</sup> Do you *really* believe you can make a voice that can drown out His?
Do you *really* believe that you can devise a thought system which can
separate you from His? Do you *really* believe that you can plan for
your safety and joy better than He can? You need be neither careful nor
careless; you need merely cast your cares upon Him, because He careth
for *you*. You *are* His care because He loves you. His Voice reminds
you always that all hope is yours *because* of His care. You *cannot*
choose to escape His care because that is not His Will, but you *can*
choose to accept His care and use the infinite power *of* His care for
all those He created *by* it.

<sup>91</sup> There have been many healers who did not heal themselves. They have
not moved mountains by their faith, because their faith was not whole.
Some of them have healed the sick at times, but they have not raised the
dead. Unless the healer heals *himself*, he does *not* believe that
there is no order of difficulty in miracles. He has not learned that
*every* mind God created is equally worthy of being healed *because God
created it whole*. You are merely asked to return to God the mind as
*He* created it. He asks you only for what He gave, knowing that this
giving will heal you. Sanity *is* wholeness, and the sanity of your
brothers *is* yours.

<sup>92</sup> Why should you listen to the endless insane calls which you think are
made upon you when you *know* the Voice of God Himself is in you? God
commended His Spirit to you and asks that you commend yours to Him. He
wills to keep it in perfect peace, because you are of one mind and
spirit with Him. Excluding yourself from the Atonement is the ego's
last-ditch defense of its *own* existence. It reflects both the ego's
need to separate and your willingness to side with its separateness.
This willingness means *that you do not want to be healed*.

<sup>93</sup> But the time *is* now. You have not been asked to work out the plan
of salvation yourselves because, as I told you before, the remedy is
*not* of your making. God Himself gave you the perfect correction for
everything you have made which is *not* in accord with His holy Will. I
have made His plan perfectly explicit to you and have also told you of
your part in His plan and how urgent it is that you fulfill it. There is
time for delay, but there need not be. God weeps at the “sacrifice” of
His Children, who believe they are lost to Him.

<sup>94</sup> I have already told you that whenever you are not wholly joyous it is
because you have reacted with a lack of love to some Soul which God
created. Perceiving this as “sin,” you become defensive because you
*expect attack*. The decision to react in this way, however, is *yours*
and can therefore be undone. It *cannot* be undone by repentance in the
usual sense because this implies guilt. If you allow yourself to feel
guilty, you will *reinforce* the error rather than allow it to be undone
*for* you.

<sup>95</sup> Decisions *cannot* be difficult. This is obvious if you realize that
you must *already* have made a decision *not* to be wholly joyous if
that is how you feel. Therefore, the first step in the undoing is to
recognize that you *actively decided wrongly* but can *as actively
decide otherwise*. Be very firm with yourselves in this, and keep
yourselves fully aware of the fact that the undoing process, which does
*not* come from you, is nevertheless *within* you because God placed it
there. *Your* part is merely to return your thinking to the point at
which the error was made and give it over to the Atonement in peace. Say
to yourselves the following as sincerely as you can, remembering that
the Holy Spirit will respond fully to your slightest invitation:

<sup>96</sup> *I must have decided wrongly, because I am **not** at peace.<br/>
I made the decision myself, but I can also decide otherwise.<br/>
I **will** to decide otherwise, because I **want** to be at peace.<br/>
I do **not** feel guilty, because the Holy Spirit will undo<br/>
all the consequences of my wrong decision **if I will let Him.**<br/>
I **will** to let Him, by allowing Him to decide for God for Me.*

