---
chapter: Five
ctitle: Healing and Wholeness
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.5.I
---

To heal is to make happy. I have told you before to think how many
opportunities you have to gladden yourselves and how many you have
refused. This is exactly the same as telling you that you have refused
to heal yourselves. The light that belongs to you is the light of joy.
Radiance is not associated with sorrow. Depression is often contagious
but, although it may affect those who come in contact with it, they do
not yield to the influence whole-heartedly. But joy calls forth an
integrated willingness to share in it and thus promotes the mind's
natural impulse *to respond as one*.

<sup>2</sup> Those who attempt to heal without being wholly joyous themselves call
forth different kinds of responses at the same time and thus deprive
others of the joy of responding whole-heartedly. To be whole-hearted,
you *must* be happy. If fear and love cannot coexist and if it is
impossible to be wholly fearful and remain alive, then the only possible
whole state *is* that of love. There is no difference between love and
joy. Therefore, the only possible whole state is the wholly joyous. To
heal or to make joyous is therefore the same as to integrate and to
*make one*. That is why it makes no difference to what part or by what
part of the Sonship the healing is done. *Every* part benefits and
benefits equally.

<sup>3</sup> *You* are being blessed by every beneficent thought of any of your
brothers anywhere. You should want to bless them in return out of
gratitude. You do not have to know them individually or they you. The
light is so strong that it radiates throughout the Sonship and returns
thanks to the Father for radiating His joy upon it. Only God's holy
Children are worthy to be channels of His beautiful joy, because only
they are beautiful enough to hold it by sharing it. It is impossible for
a Child of God to love his neighbor *except* as himself. That is why the
healer's prayer is:

<sup>4</sup> *Let me know this brother as I know myself*.

