---
chapter: Five
ctitle: Healing and Wholeness
title: Healing as Joining
ref: Tx.5.II
---

<sup>5</sup> Healing is an act of thought by which two minds perceive their oneness
and become glad. This gladness calls to every part of the Sonship to
rejoice with them and lets God Himself go out into them and through
them. Only the healed mind can experience revelation with lasting
effect, because revelation is an experience of pure joy. If you do not
choose to be wholly joyous, your mind cannot *have* what it does not
choose to *be*. Remember that the Soul knows no difference between
“being” and “having.” The higher mind thinks according to the laws which
the Soul obeys and therefore honors only the laws of God. To Him,
getting is meaningless and giving is all. Having everything, the Soul
*holds* everything *by* giving it and thus creates as the Father
created.

<sup>6</sup> If you think about it, you will see that, while this kind of thinking
is totally alien to having *things*, even to the lower mind it is quite
comprehensible in connection with *ideas*. If you share a physical
possession, you *do* divide its ownership. If you share an idea,
however, you do not lessen it. All of it is still yours, although all of
it has been given away. Further, if the person to whom you give it
accepts it as *his*, he reinforces it in *your* mind, and thus
*increases* it. If you can accept the concept that the world *is* one of
ideas, the whole belief in the false association which the ego makes
between giving and *losing* is gone.

<sup>7</sup> Let us start our process of reawakening with just a few simple
concepts:

<sup>8</sup> *Thoughts **increase** by being given away.<br/>
The more who believe in them, the **stronger** they become.<br/>
**Everything** is an idea.<br/>
How, then, is it possible that giving and losing **can** be<br/>
meaningfully associated?*

<sup>9</sup> This is the invitation to the Holy Spirit. I told you that I could
reach up and bring the Holy Spirit down to you, but I can bring Him to
you *only* at your own invitation. The Holy Spirit is nothing more than
your own right mind. He was also mine.  The Bible says, “May the mind be
in you that was also in Christ Jesus,” and uses this as a *blessing*. It
is the blessing of miracle-mindedness.  It asks that you may think as I
thought, joining with me in Christ-thinking.

<sup>10</sup> The Holy Spirit is the only part of the Holy Trinity which is
symbolic. He is referred to in the Bible as the Healer, the Comforter,
and the Guide. He is also described as something “separate,” apart from
the Father and from the Son. I myself said, “If I go I will send you
another comforter, and He will abide with you.” The Holy Spirit is a
difficult concept to grasp precisely because it *is* symbolic and
therefore open to many different interpretations. As a man and as one of
God's creations, my right thinking, which came from the Universal
Inspiration which *is* the Holy Spirit, taught me first and foremost
that this Inspiration is for all. I could not have It myself *without*
knowing this.

<sup>11</sup> The word “know” is proper in this context because the Holy
Inspiration is so close to knowledge that it calls it forth; or better,
allows it to come. We have spoken before of the higher or the “true”
perception, which is so close to truth that God Himself can flow across
the little gap. Knowledge is always ready to flow everywhere, but it
cannot oppose. Therefore, you can obstruct it, although you can never
lose it. The Holy Spirit is the Christ Mind, which senses the knowledge
that lies beyond perception. It came into being with the separation as a
protection, inspiring the beginning of the Atonement at the same time.
Before that, there was no need for healing and no one was comfortless.

