---
chapter: Five
ctitle: Healing and Wholeness
title: The Mind of the Atonement
ref: Tx.5.III
---

<sup>12</sup> God honored even the miscreations of His Children because they had
made them, but He also blessed them with a way of thinking that could
raise their perceptions until they became so lofty that they could reach
almost back to Him. The Holy Spirit is the Mind of the Atonement. It
represents a state of mind that comes close enough to One-Mindedness
that transfer to it is at last possible. Transfer depends on common
elements in the old learning and the new situation to which it is
transferred. Perception is not knowledge, but it can be transferred *to*
knowledge or *cross over* into it. It might even be more helpful here to
use the literal meaning of “carried” over since the last step is taken
by God.

<sup>13</sup> The Holy Spirit, the shared Inspiration of all the Sonship, induces a
kind of perception in which many elements are like those in the Kingdom
of Heaven itself.

<sup>14</sup> First, its universality is perfectly clear, and no one who receives
it could ever believe for one instant that sharing it involves anything
*but* gain.

<sup>15</sup> Second, it is incapable of attack and is therefore truly open. This
means that, although it does not engender knowledge, it does not
*obstruct* it in any way. \[Third, it is an unequivocal call to love.
Every other voice is still.\]

<sup>16</sup> There is a point at which sufficient quantitative changes produce
real qualitative differences. The next point requires real
understanding, because it is the point at which the shift occurs.
Finally, it points the way *beyond* the healing which it brings and
leads the mind beyond its own integration into the paths of creation.

<sup>17</sup> Healing is not creating; it is reparation. The Holy Spirit promotes
healing by looking *beyond* it to what the Children of God were before
healing was needed and will be when they have *been* healed. This
alteration of the time sequence should be quite familiar, because it is
very similar to the shift in time perception which the miracle
introduces. The Holy Spirit is the *motivation* for miracle-mindedness,
the will to *heal* the separation by letting it go. This will is *in*
you, because God placed it in your mind, and although you can keep it
asleep, you cannot obliterate it.

<sup>18</sup> God Himself keeps this will alive by transmitting it from His Mind to
yours as long as there is time. It is partly His and partly yours. The
miracle itself is just this fusion or union of will between Father and
Son. The Holy Spirit is the spirit of joy. He is the Call to return with
which God blessed the minds of His separated Sons. This is the vocation
of the mind. The mind had no calling until the separation, because
before that it had only *being* and would not have understood the call
to right thinking. The Holy Spirit was God's Answer to the separation,
the means by which the Atonement could repair until the whole mind
returned to creating.

<sup>19</sup> The Atonement and the separation began at the same time. When man
made the ego, God placed in him the call to joy. This call is so strong
that the ego always dissolves at its sound. That is why you can choose
to listen to two voices within you. One you made yourself and that one
is not of God. But the other is given you *by* God Who asks you only to
listen to it. The Holy Spirit is in you in a very literal sense. His is
the Voice that calls you back to where you were before and will be
again.

