---
chapter: Five
ctitle: Healing and Wholeness
title: The Guide to Salvation
ref: Tx.5.V
---

<sup>32</sup> The way to learn to know your brother is by perceiving the Holy
Spirit in him. We have already said that the Holy Spirit is the bridge
or thought-transfer of perception to knowledge, so we can use the terms
as if they were related, because in His Mind they *are*. The
relationship *must* be in His Mind because, unless it were, the
separation between the two ways of thinking would not be open to
healing. He is part of the Holy Trinity because His Mind is partly yours
and also partly God's. This needs clarification, not in statement, since
we have said it before, but in *experience*.

<sup>33</sup> The Holy Spirit is the *idea* of healing. Being thought, the idea
*gains as it is shared*. Being the Call *for* God, it is also the idea
*of* God. Since *you* are part of God, it is also the idea of *yourself*
as well as of all the parts of God. The idea of the Holy Spirit shares
the property of other ideas, because it follows the laws of the Universe
of which it is a part. Therefore, it is strengthened by being given
away. It increases in *you* as you give it to your brothers. Since
thoughts do not have to be conscious to exist, your brother does not
have to be aware of the Holy Spirit either in himself or in you for this
miracle to occur.

<sup>34</sup> Your brother may have dissociated the Call for God, just as *you*
have. The dissociation is healed in *both* of you as *you* become aware
of the Call for God in him and thus acknowledge its *being*. There are
two ways of seeing your brother which are diametrically opposed to each
other. They must both be in *your* mind, because *you* are the
perceiver. They must also be in *his*, because you are perceiving *him*.
See him through the Holy Spirit in *his* mind, and you will recognize
Him in *yours*. What you acknowledge in your brother you *are*
acknowledging in yourself, and what you share you strengthen.

<sup>35</sup> The Voice of the Holy Spirit *is* weak in you. That is why you *must*
share it. It must be *increased* in strength before *you* can hear it.
It is impossible to hear it in yourself while it is so weak in your
*own* mind. It is not weak in itself, but it *is* limited by your
unwillingness to hear it. Will itself is an idea and is therefore
strengthened by being shared. If you make the mistake of looking for the
Holy Spirit in yourself alone, your meditations will frighten you
because by *adopting* the ego's viewpoint you are undertaking an
ego-alien journey with the ego as *guide*. This is *bound* to produce
fear.

<sup>36</sup> Delay is of the ego, because time is *its* concept. Delay is
obviously a time idea. Both time and delay are meaningless in eternity.
We have said before that the Holy Spirit is God's *Answer* to the ego.
Everything of which the Holy Spirit reminds you is in direct opposition
to the ego's notions, because true and false perceptions are
*themselves* opposed. The Holy Spirit has the task of *undoing* what the
ego has made. He undoes it in the same realm of discourse in which the
ego itself operates, or the mind would be unable to understand the
change.

<sup>37</sup> We have repeatedly emphasized that one level of the mind is not
understandable to another. So it is with the ego and the Soul, with time
and eternity. Eternity is an idea of God, so the Soul understands it
perfectly. Time is a belief of the ego, so the lower mind, which *is*
the ego's domain, accepts it without question. The only aspect of time
which is really eternal is *now*. That is what we really mean when we
say that “now is the only time.” The literal nature of this statement
does not mean anything to the ego, which interprets it at best to mean
“don't worry about the future.” That is not what it really means at all.

<sup>38</sup> The Holy Spirit is the Mediator between the interpretations of the
ego and the knowledge of the Soul. His ability to deal with symbols
enables Him to work *against* the ego's beliefs in its own language. His
equal ability to look *beyond* symbols into eternity also enables Him to
understand the laws of God, for which He speaks. He can thus perform the
function of *reinterpreting* what the ego makes, *not* by destruction
but by *understanding*. Understanding is light, and light leads to
knowledge. The Holy Spirit is *in* light because He is in you who *are*
light, but you yourselves do not know this. It is therefore the task of
the Holy Spirit to reinterpret *you* on behalf of God.

<sup>39</sup> You cannot understand yourselves alone. This is because you have no
meaning *apart* from your rightful place in the Sonship and the rightful
place of the Sonship \[is\] God. This is your life, your eternity, and
*yourself*. It is of this that the Holy Spirit reminds you. It is this
that the Holy Spirit *sees*. This vision invariably frightens the ego
because it is so calm. Peace is the ego's greatest enemy because,
according to *its* interpretation of reality, war is the guarantee of
its survival. The ego becomes strong in strife. If you believe there
*is* strife, you will react viciously because the idea of danger has
entered your mind. The idea itself *is* an appeal to the ego.

<sup>40</sup> The Holy Spirit is as vigilant as the ego to the call of danger,
opposing it with His strength, just as the ego *welcomes* it with all
its might. The Holy Spirit counters this welcome by welcoming peace.
Peace and eternity are as closely related as are time and war.
Perception as well as knowledge derives meaning from relationships.
Those which you accept are the foundations of your beliefs. The
separation is merely another term for a split mind. It was not an act,
but a *thought*. Therefore, the idea of separation can be given away,
just as the idea of unity can. Either way, the idea will be strengthened
*in the mind of the giver*.

<sup>41</sup> The ego is the symbol of separation, just as the Holy Spirit is the
symbol of peace. What you perceive in others, you are strengthening in
*yourself*. You let your mind misperceive, but the Holy Spirit lets your
mind reinterpret its own misperceptions. The Holy Spirit is the perfect
teacher. He uses only what your minds *already* understand to teach you
that you do *not* understand it. The Holy Spirit can deal with an
unwilling learner without going counter to his will because part of his
will *is* still for God. Despite the ego's attempts to conceal this
part, it is still much stronger than the ego, even though the ego does
not recognize it. The Holy Spirit recognizes it perfectly, because it is
His own dwelling place or the place in the mind where He is at home.

<sup>42</sup> *You* are at home there, too, because it is a place of peace, and
peace is of God. You who are part of God are not at home *except* in His
peace. If peace is eternal, you are at home only in eternity. The ego
made the world as *it* perceives it, but the Holy Spirit, the
*reinterpreter* of what the ego made, sees it only as a teaching device
for bringing you home. The Holy Spirit must perceive time and
reinterpret it into the timeless. The mind must be led into eternity
*through* time because, having made time, it is capable of perceiving
its opposite.

<sup>43</sup> The Holy Spirit must work through opposites, because He must work
with and for a mind that *is* in opposition. Correct and learn and be
open to learning. You have *not* made truth, but truth can still set you
free. Look as the Holy Spirit looks, and understand as He understands.
His understanding looks back to God in remembrance of me. He is in Holy
Communion always, and He is part of *you*. He is your Guide to
salvation, because He holds the remembrance of things past and to come.
He holds this gladness gently in your minds, asking only that you
*increase* it in His name by sharing it, to increase His joy in *you*.

