---
chapter: Thirteen
ctitle: From Perception to Knowledge
title: The Happy Learner
ref: Tx.13.VII
---

<sup>54</sup> The Holy Spirit needs a happy learner in whom His mission can be
happily accomplished. You who are steadfastly devoted to misery must
first recognize that you *are* miserable and *not* happy. The Holy
Spirit cannot teach without this contrast, for you believe that misery
*is* happiness. This has so confused you that you have undertaken to
learn to do what you can *never* do, believing that *unless* you learn
it, you will not be happy. You do not realize that the foundation on
which this most peculiar learning goal depends means *absolutely
nothing*. It *does* make sense to you.

<sup>55</sup> Have faith in nothing, and you will *find* the “treasure” that you
sought. Yet you will add another burden to your mind, *already* burdened
or you would not have sought another. You will believe that nothing is
*of value* and *will* value it. A little piece of glass, a speck of
dust, a body or a war are one to you. For if you value *one* thing made
of nothing, you *have* believed that nothing can be precious and that
you *can* learn how to make the untrue *true*.

<sup>56</sup> The Holy Spirit, *seeing* where you are but *knowing* you are
elsewhere, begins His lesson in simplicity with the fundamental teaching
that *truth is true*. This is the hardest lesson you will ever learn,
and in the end the *only* one. Simplicity is very difficult for twisted
minds. Consider all the distortions you have made of nothing—all the
strange forms and feelings and actions and reactions that you have woven
out of it. Nothing is so alien to you as the simple truth, and nothing
are you less inclined to listen to. The contrast between what is true
and what is not is *perfectly* apparent, yet you do not see it.

<sup>57</sup> The simple and the obvious are not apparent to those who would make
palaces and royal robes of nothing, believing they are kings with golden
crowns because of them. All this the Holy Spirit sees and teaches simply
that all this is not true. To these unhappy learners who would teach
themselves nothing and delude themselves into believing that it is *not*
nothing, the Holy Spirit says, with steadfast quietness:

<sup>58</sup> *The truth is true. Nothing else matters, nothing else is real, and
everything beside it is not there. Let Me make the one distinction for
you which you cannot make but need to **learn**. Your faith in
nothing **is** deceiving you. Offer your faith to Me, and I will
place it gently in the holy place where it belongs. You will find
**no** deception there but only the simple truth. And you will love
it because you will **understand** it.*

<sup>59</sup> Like you, the Holy Spirit did not *make* truth. Like God, He *knows*
it to be true. He brings the light of truth into the darkness and *lets*
it shine on you. And as it shines, your brothers see it, and realizing
that this light is not what you have made, they see in you more than
*you* see. They will be happy learners of the lesson which this light
brings to them because it teaches them *release* from nothing and from
all the works of nothing.  The heavy chains which seem to bind them unto
despair they do not see as nothing until you bring the light to them.
And *then* they see the chains have disappeared, and so they *must* have
been nothing. And *you* will see it with them. *Because* you taught them
gladness and release, they will become *your* teachers in release and
gladness.

<sup>60</sup> When you teach anyone that truth is true, you learn it *with* him.
And so you learn that what seemed hardest was the easiest. Learn to be
happy learners. You will *never* learn how to make nothing everything.
Yet see that this *has* been your goal and *recognize* how foolish it
has been. Be glad it is undone, for when you look at it in simple
honesty, it *is* undone. We said before, “Be not content with nothing,”
for you *have* believed that nothing could content you. *It is not so*.

<sup>61</sup> If you would be a happy learner, you must give *everything* that you
have learned over to the Holy Spirit to be *unlearned* for you. And then
begin to learn the joyous lessons that come quickly on the firm
foundation that truth is true. For what is builded there *is* true and
*built* on truth. The universe of learning will open up before you in
all its gracious simplicity. With truth before you, you will not look
back.

<sup>62</sup> The happy learner meets the conditions of learning here, as he also
meets the conditions of knowledge in the Kingdom. All this lies in the
Holy Spirit's plan to free you from the past and open up the way to
freedom for you. For truth *is* true. What else could ever be or ever
was? This simple lesson holds the key to the dark door which you believe
is locked forever. You *made* this door of nothing and behind it *is*
nothing. The key is only the light which shines away the shapes and
forms and fears of nothing. Accept this key to freedom from the hands of
Christ Who gives it to you that you may join Him in the holy task of
bringing light to darkness. For, like your brothers, you do not realize
the light has come and *freed* you from the sleep of darkness.

<sup>63</sup> Behold your brothers in their freedom and learn of them how to be
*free* of darkness. The light in you will waken them, and they will not
leave *you* asleep. The vision of Christ is given the very instant that
it is perceived. Where everything is clear, it is all holy. The
quietness of its simplicity is so compelling that you will realize it is
*impossible* to deny the simple truth. For there *is* nothing else. God
is everywhere, and His Son is in Him with everything. Can he sing the
dirge of sorrow when *this* is true?

