---
chapter: Thirteen
ctitle: From Perception to Knowledge
title: The Decision for Guiltlessness
ref: Tx.13.VIII
---

<sup>64</sup> Learning will be commensurate with motivation, and the interference
in your motivation for learning is exactly the same as that which
interferes with *all* your thinking. The happy learner cannot *feel*
*guilty* about learning. This is so essential to learning that it should
never be forgotten. The guiltless learner learns so easily because his
thoughts are free. Yet this entails the recognition that guilt is
*interference, not* salvation, and serves no useful function at all.

<sup>65</sup> You are accustomed to using guiltlessness merely to offset the pain
of guilt and do not look upon it as having value *in itself*. You
believe that guilt and guiltlessness are *both* of value, each
representing an escape from what the other does not offer you. You do
not want either alone, for without both, you do not see yourselves as
whole and therefore happy. Yet you are whole *only* in your
guiltlessness, and only in your guiltlessness *can* you be happy. There
*is* no conflict here. To wish for guilt in *any* way, in *any* form,
will lose appreciation of the value of your guiltlessness and push it
from your sight.

<sup>66</sup> There is no compromise that you can make with guilt and escape the
pain which *only* guiltlessness allays. Learning is living here, as
creating is being in Heaven. Whenever the pain of guilt *seems* to
attract you, remember that, if you yield to it, you are deciding
*against* your happiness and will not learn *how* to be happy. Say
therefore to yourself gently, but with the conviction born of the love
of God and of His Son,

<sup>67</sup> *What I experience, I will make manifest.<br/>
If I am guiltless, I have nothing to fear.<br/>
I choose to testify to my **acceptance** of
the Atonement, **not** for its rejection.<br/>
I would accept my guiltlessness by making it manifest and **sharing** it.<br/>
Let me bring peace to God's Son from his Father.*

<sup>68</sup> Each day, each hour and minute, even every second, you are deciding
between the crucifixion and the resurrection, between the ego and the
Holy Spirit. The ego is the choice for guilt; the Holy Spirit the
decision for guiltlessness. The power of decision is all that is yours.
What you can decide *between* is fixed because there are no alternatives
except truth and illusion. And there is no overlap between them because
they are opposites which *cannot* be reconciled and *cannot* both be
true. You are guilty *or* guiltless, bound *or* free, happy *or*
unhappy.

<sup>69</sup> The miracle teaches you that you have chosen guiltlessness, freedom,
and joy. It is not a cause, but an *effect*. It is the natural result of
choosing right, attesting to your happiness that comes from choosing to
be free of guilt. Everyone you offer healing to returns it. Everyone you
attack keeps it and cherishes it by holding it against you. Whether he
does this or does it not will make no difference; you will *think* he
does. It is impossible to offer what you do not want without this
penalty. The cost of giving *is* receiving. Either it is a penalty from
which you suffer or the happy purchase of a treasure to hold dear.

<sup>70</sup> No penalty is ever asked of God's Son except *by* himself and *of*
himself. Every chance given him to heal is another opportunity to
replace darkness with light and fear with love. If he refuses it, he
binds himself to darkness because he did not choose to free his brother
and enter light with him. By *giving* power to nothing, he threw away
the joyous opportunity to learn that nothing *has* no power. And by
*not* dispelling darkness, he became afraid of darkness *and* of light.
The joy of learning that darkness has no power over the Son of God is
the happy lesson the Holy Spirit teaches and would have *you* teach with
Him. It is *His* joy to teach it, as it will be *yours.*

<sup>71</sup> The way to teach this simple lesson is merely this: guiltlessness
*is* invulnerability. Therefore, make your invulnerability manifest to
everyone, and teach him that *whatever* he may try to do to you, your
perfect freedom from the belief that you can be harmed shows him *he* is
guiltless. He can do *nothing* that can hurt you, and by refusing to
allow him to *think* he can, you teach him that the Atonement, which you
have accepted for *yourself*, is also *his.* There *is* nothing to
forgive. No one can hurt the Son of God. His guilt is wholly without
cause, and being without cause, *cannot* exist.

<sup>72</sup> God is the *only* Cause, and guilt is not of Him. Teach no one he has
hurt you, for if you do, you teach yourself that what is not of God
*has* power over you. *The causeless cannot be*. Do not attest to it,
and do not foster belief in it in any mind. Remember always that *mind*
is one and *cause* is one. You will learn communication with this
oneness *only* when you learn to *deny* the causeless and accept the
Cause of God as *yours*. The power that God has given to His Son *is*
his, and nothing else can His Son see or choose to look upon without
imposing on himself the penalty of guilt *in place* of all the happy
teaching the Holy Spirit would gladly offer him.

<sup>73</sup> Whenever you decide to make decisions for yourself, you are thinking
destructively, and the decision *will* be wrong. It will hurt you
because of the concept of decision which led to it. It is not true that
you can make decisions *by* yourself or *for* yourself alone. No thought
of God's Son *can* be separate or isolated in its effects. Every
decision is made for the *whole* Sonship, directed in and out and
influencing a constellation larger than anything you ever dreamed of.
Those who accept the Atonement *are* invulnerable. But those who believe
they are guilty *will* respond to guilt because they think it is
salvation and will not refuse to see it and side with it. \[They
*believe* that *increasing* guilt is self-*protection*.\] And they will
fail to understand the simple fact that what they do not want *must*
hurt them.

<sup>74</sup> All this arises because they do not believe that what they want is
*good*. Yet will was given them *because* it is holy and will bring to
them *all* that they need, coming as naturally as peace that knows no
limits. There is nothing their wills will not provide that offers them
*anything* of value. Yet because they do not understand their will, the
Holy Spirit quietly understands it *for* them and *gives* them what they
will without effort, strain, or the impossible burden of deciding what
they want and need alone.

<sup>75</sup> It will never happen that you will have to make decisions for
yourself. You are not bereft of help, and Help that *knows* the answer.
Would you be content with little, which is all that you alone can offer
yourself, when He Who gives you everything will simply *offer* it to
you? He will never ask what you have done to make you worthy of the gift
of God. Ask it not therefore of yourselves. Instead, accept His answer,
for He *knows* that you are worthy of everything God wills for you. Do
not try to escape the gift of God which He so freely and so gladly
offers you. He offers you but what God gave Him *for* you. You need not
decide whether or not you are deserving of it. God knows you *are.*

<sup>76</sup> Would you deny the truth of God's decision and place your pitiful
appraisal of yourself in place of His calm and unswerving value of His
Son? *Nothing* can shake God's conviction of the perfect purity of
everything that He created, for it *is* wholly pure. Do not decide
against it, for being of Him, it *must* be true. Peace abides in every
mind that quietly accepts the plan which God has set for his Atonement,
relinquishing his *own*. You know not of salvation, for you do not
understand it. Make no decisions about what it is or where it lies, but
ask of the Holy Spirit everything and leave *all* decisions to His
gentle counsel.

<sup>77</sup> The One Who knows the plan of God which God would have you follow can
teach you what it *is*. Only *His* wisdom is capable of guiding you to
follow it. Every decision you undertake alone but signifies that you
would define what salvation *is* and what you would be saved *from*. The
Holy Spirit knows that *all* salvation is escape from guilt. You have no
other “enemy,” and against this strange distortion of the purity of the
Son of God, the Holy Spirit is your *only* friend. He is the strong
protector of your innocence, which sets you free. And it is *His*
decision to undo everything that would obscure your innocence from your
unclouded mind.

<sup>78</sup> Let Him, therefore, be the *only* Guide that you would follow to
salvation. He knows the way and leads you gladly on it. *With* Him you
will not fail to learn what God wills for you *is* your will. *Without*
His guidance, you will think you know alone and will decide *against*
your peace as surely as you made the wrong decision in ever thinking
that salvation lay in you alone. Salvation is of Him to Whom God gave it
for you. He has not forgotten it. Forget Him not, and He will make every
decision for you, for your salvation, and the peace of God in you.

<sup>79</sup> Seek not to appraise the worth of God's Son, whom He created holy,
for to do so is to evaluate his Father and judge *against* Him. And you
*will* feel guilty for this imagined crime, which no one in this world
or Heaven could possibly commit. God's Spirit teaches only that the
“sin” of self-replacement on the throne of God is *not* a source of
guilt. What cannot happen can have *no* effects to fear. Be quiet in
your faith in Him Who loves you and would lead you out of insanity.
Madness may be your choice, but *not* your reality. Never forget the
love of God, Who *has* remembered you. For it is quite impossible that
He could ever let His Son drop from His loving mind wherein he was
created and where his abode was fixed in perfect peace forever.

<sup>80</sup> Say to the Holy Spirit only, “Decide for me,” and it is done. For His
decisions are reflections of what God *knows* about you, and in this
light, error of *any* kind becomes impossible. Why would you struggle so
frantically to anticipate all that you *cannot* know when all knowledge
lies behind every decision which the Holy Spirit makes *for* you? Learn
of His wisdom and His love and teach His answer to everyone who
struggles in the dark. For you decide for them *and* for yourself.

<sup>81</sup> How gracious is it to decide all things through Him Whose equal love
is given equally to all alike! He leaves you no one *outside* yourself,
alone *without* you. And so He gives you what is yours because your
Father would have you share it with Him. In everything be led by Him and
do not reconsider. Trust Him to answer quickly, surely, and with love
for everyone who will be touched in any way by the decision. And
everyone *will* be. Would you take unto yourself the sole responsibility
for deciding what can bring *only* good to everyone? Would you *know*
this?

<sup>82</sup> You taught yourselves the most unnatural habit of *not* communicating
with your Creator. Yet you remain in close communication with Him and
with everything that is within Him, as it is within yourself. *Unlearn*
isolation through His loving guidance and learn of all the happy
communication that you have thrown away but could not lose.

<sup>83</sup> Whenever you are in doubt what you should do, think of His Presence
in you and tell yourself this and *only* this:

<sup>84</sup> *He leadeth me and knows the way, which I know not.<br/>
Yet He will never **keep** from me what He would have me **learn**.<br/>
And so I trust Him to communicate to me all that He knows **for** me.*

<sup>85</sup> Then let Him teach you quietly how to perceive your guiltlessness,
which is *already* there.

