---
chapter: Thirteen
ctitle: From Perception to Knowledge
title: Release and Restoration
ref: Tx.13.IV
---

<sup>20</sup> You are accustomed to the notion that the mind can see the source of
pain where it is not. The doubtful service of displacement is to hide
the *real* source of your guilt and *keep* from your awareness the full
perception *that it is insane*. Displacement always is maintained by the
illusion that the source, from which attention is diverted, must be
*true and must be fearful*, or you would not have displaced the guilt
onto what you believed to be *less* fearful. You are therefore willing
with little opposition to look upon all sorts of “sources” underneath
awareness, provided that they are not the deeper source to which they
bear no real relationship at all.

<sup>21</sup> Insane ideas *have* no real relationships, for that is *why* they are
insane. No real relationship can rest on guilt or even hold one spot of
it to mar its purity. For all relationships which guilt has touched are
used but to avoid the person *and* the guilt. What strange relationships
you have made for this strange purpose! And you forgot that real
relationships are holy and cannot be used by *you* at all. They are used
only by the Holy Spirit, and it is that which *makes* them pure. \[If
you displace *your* guilt upon them, the Holy Spirit cannot use them.\]
For by preempting for your *own* ends what you should have given to Him,
He cannot use them unto *your* release. No one who would unite in *any*
way with *anyone* for his *own* salvation will find it in that strange
relationship. It is not shared, and so it is not real.

<sup>22</sup> In any union with a brother in which you seek to lay your guilt upon
him or share it with him or perceive his own, you *will* feel guilty.
Nor will you find satisfaction and peace with him, because your union
with him is *not* real. You will see guilt in that relationship because
you *put* it there. It is inevitable that those who suffer guilt *will*
attempt to displace it, because they *do* believe in it. Yet, though
they suffer, they will not look within and let it *go*. They cannot know
they love and cannot understand what loving *is*. Their main concern is
to perceive the source of guilt outside themselves, *beyond* their own
control.

<sup>23</sup> When you maintain that you are guilty but the source lies in the
*past*, you are *not* looking inward. The past is not *in* you. Your
weird associations to it have no meaning in the present. Yet you let
them stand between you and your brothers, with whom you find no *real*
relationships at all. Can you expect to use your brothers as a means to
“solve” the past and still to see them as they really are? Salvation is
not found by those who use their brothers to resolve problems which are
not there. You wanted not salvation in the past. Would you impose your
idle wishes on the present and hope to find salvation *now*?

<sup>24</sup> Determine, then, to be not as you were. Use no relationship to hold
you to the past, but with each one each day be born again. A minute,
even less, will be enough to free you from the past and give your mind
in peace over to the Atonement. When everyone is welcome to you as you
would have yourself be welcome to your Father, you will see no guilt in
you. For you will have accepted the Atonement, which shone within you
all the while you dreamed of guilt and would not look within and see it.

<sup>25</sup> As long as you believe that guilt is justified in *any* way in
*anyone whatever* he may do, you will not look within, where you would
*always* find Atonement. The end of guilt will never come as long as you
believe there is a *reason* for it. For you must learn that guilt is
*always* totally insane and *has* no reason. The Holy Spirit seeks not
to dispel reality. If *guilt* were real, *Atonement* would not be. The
purpose of Atonement is to dispel illusions, not to establish them as
real and *then* forgive them.

<sup>26</sup> The Holy Spirit does not keep illusions in your mind to frighten you
and show them to you fearfully to demonstrate what He has saved you
*from*. What He has saved you from is *gone*. Give no reality to guilt,
and see *no* reason for it. The Holy Spirit does what God would have Him
do and has always done so. He has seen separation, but knows of union.
He teaches healing, but He also knows of creation. He would have you see
and teach as He does, and through Him. Yet what He knows, you do not
know, though it is yours.

<sup>27</sup> *Now* it is given you to heal and teach, to make what will be *now*.
As yet it is *not* now. The Son of God believes that he is lost in
guilt, alone in a dark world where pain is pressing everywhere upon him
from *without*. When he has looked within and seen the radiance there,
he will remember how much his Father loves him. And it will seem
incredible that he has ever thought his Father loved him not and looked
upon him as condemned. The moment that you realize guilt is *insane,
wholly* unjustified, and *wholly* without reason, you will not fear to
look upon the Atonement and accept it wholly.

<sup>28</sup> You who have been unmerciful unto yourselves do not remember your
Father's Love. And looking without mercy upon your brothers, you do not
remember how much you love *Him*. Yet it is forever true. In shining
peace within you is the perfect purity in which you were created. Fear
not to look upon the lovely truth in you. Look *through* the cloud of
guilt that dims your vision, and look *past* darkness to the holy place
where you will see the light. The altar to your Father is as pure as He
Who raised it to Himself. Nothing can keep from you what Christ would
have you see. His Will is like His Father's, and He offers mercy to
every Child of God, as He would have *you* do.

<sup>29</sup> *Release* from guilt as you would *be* released. There is no other
way to look within and see the light of love shining as steadily and as
surely as God Himself has always loved His Son. *And as His son loves
Him*. There is no fear in love, for love is guiltless. You who have
always loved your Father can have no fear for *any* reason to look
within and see your holiness. You cannot *be* as you believed you were.
Your guilt is without reason, because it is not in the Mind of God where
*you* are. And this *is* reason, which the Holy Spirit would *restore*
to you. He would remove only illusions. All else He would have you see.
And in Christ's vision, He would show you the perfect purity that is
forever within God's Son.

<sup>30</sup> You cannot enter into *real* relationships with any of God's Sons
unless you love them all and *equally*. Love is not special. If you
single out *part* of the Sonship for your love, you are imposing guilt
on *all* your relationships and making them unreal. You can love *only*
as God loves. Seek not to love unlike Him, for there *is* no love apart
from His. Until you recognize that this is true, you will have no idea
what love is like. No one who condemns a brother can see himself as
guiltless in the peace of God. If he *is* guiltless and in peace and
sees it not, he *is* delusional and has not looked upon himself. To him
I say,

<sup>31</sup> *Behold the Son of God and look upon his purity and<br/>
be still. In quiet look upon his holiness and offer thanks<br/>
unto his Father that no guilt has ever touched him.*

<sup>32</sup> No illusion that you have ever held against him has touched his
innocence in any way. His shining purity, wholly untouched by guilt and
wholly loving, is bright within you. Let us look upon him together and
love him. For in our love of him is your guiltlessness. But look upon
yourself, and gladness and appreciation for what you see will banish
guilt forever. I thank You, Father, for the purity of Your most holy
Son, whom You have created guiltless forever.

<sup>33</sup> Like you my faith and my belief are centered on what I treasure. The
difference is that I love *only* what God loves with me, and because of
this, I treasure you beyond the value that you set on yourselves, even
unto the worth that God has placed upon you. I love all that He created,
and all my faith and my belief I offer unto it. My faith in you is
strong as all the love I give my Father. My trust in you is without
limit and without the fear that you will hear me not. I thank the Father
for your loveliness and for the many gifts that you will let me offer to
the Kingdom in honor of its wholeness, which is of God.

<sup>34</sup> Praise be unto you who make the Father one with His own Son. Alone we
are all lowly, but together we shine with brightness so intense that
none of us alone can even think on it. Before the glorious radiance of
the Kingdom, guilt melts away and, transformed into kindness, will never
more be what it was. Every reaction that you experience will be so
purified that it is fitting as a hymn of praise unto your Father. See
only praise of Him in what He has created, for He will never cease His
praise of *you*. United in this praise, we stand before the gates of
Heaven where we will surely enter in our blamelessness. God loves you.
Could I, then, lack faith in you and love Him perfectly?

<sup>35</sup> Forgetfulness and sleep and even death become the ego's best advice
for how to deal with the perceived and harsh intrusion of guilt on
peace. Yet no one sees himself in conflict and ravaged by a cruel war
unless he believes that *both* opponents in the war are real. Believing
this, he must escape, for such a war would surely end his peace of mind
and so destroy him. Yet if he could but realize the war is between
forces that are real and *unreal* powers, he could look upon himself and
*see* his freedom. No one finds himself ravaged and torn in endless
battles which he *himself* perceives as wholly without meaning.

<sup>36</sup> God would not have His Son embattled, and so His Son's imagined
“enemy,” which he made, is *totally* unreal. You are but trying to
escape a bitter war from which you *have* escaped. The war is gone. For
you have heard the hymn of freedom rising unto Heaven. Gladness and joy
belong to God for your release, because you made it not. Yet as you made
not freedom, so you made not a war that could *endanger* freedom.
Nothing destructive ever was or will be. The war, the guilt, the past
are gone as one into the unreality from which they came.

