---
chapter: Thirteen
ctitle: From Perception to Knowledge
title: The Testimony of Miracles
ref: Tx.13.VI
---

<sup>47</sup> Yes, you are blessed indeed. Yet in this world, you do not know it.
But you have the means for learning it and seeing it quite clearly. The
Holy Spirit uses logic as easily and as well as does the ego, except
that His conclusions are *not* insane. They take a direction exactly
opposite, pointing as clearly to Heaven as the ego points to darkness
and to death. We have followed much of the ego's logic and have seen its
logical conclusions. And having seen them, we have realized that they
cannot be seen but in illusions, for there alone their seeming clearness
*seems* to be clearly seen. Let us now turn away from them and follow
the simple logic by which the Holy Spirit teaches you the simple
conclusions that speak for truth and *only* truth.

<sup>48</sup> If you are blessed and do not know it, you need to *learn* it must be
so. The knowledge is not taught, but its *conditions* must be acquired,
for it is they that have been thrown away. You *can* learn to bless and
*cannot* give what you have not. If, then, you *offer* blessing, it
*must* have come first to yourself. And you must also have *accepted* it
as yours, for how else could you give it away?

<sup>49</sup> That is why your miracles offer *you* the testimony that you are
blessed. If what you offer *is* complete forgiveness, you *must* have
let guilt go, accepting the Atonement for yourself and learning you are
guiltless. How could you learn what has been done for you, but which you
do not know, unless you do what you would *have* to do if it *had* been
done unto you? *In*direct proof of truth is needed in a world made of
denial and without direction. You will perceive the need for this if you
will realize that to deny is the decision *not* to know. The logic of
the world *must* therefore lead to nothing, for its *goal* is nothing.

<sup>50</sup> If you decide to have and give and *be* nothing except a dream, you
*must* direct your thoughts unto oblivion. And if you have and give and
are *everything*, and all this has been *denied*, your thought system is
closed off and wholly separated from the truth. This *is* an insane
world, and do not underestimate the actual extent of its insanity. There
is no area of your perception that it has not touched, and your dream
*is* sacred to you. That is why God placed the Holy Spirit *in* you,
where you placed the dream.

<sup>51</sup> Seeing is always *outward*. Were your thoughts wholly of *you*, the
thought system which you made would be forever dark. The thoughts which
the Mind of God's Son projects have all the power that he gives to them.
The thoughts he shares with God are *beyond* his belief, but those he
made *are* his beliefs. And it is *these*, and *not* the truth, that he
has chosen to defend and love. They will not be taken from him. But they
can be *given up* by him, for the Source of their undoing is *in* him.
There is nothing *in* the world to teach him that the logic of the world
is totally insane and leads to nothing. Yet in him who made this insane
logic, there is One Who *knows* it leads to nothing, for He knows
everything.

<sup>52</sup> Any direction which will lead you where the Holy Spirit leads you not
goes nowhere. Anything you deny which He knows to be true, you have
denied *yourself*, and He must therefore teach you *not* to deny it.
Undoing *is* indirect, as doing is. You were created only to *create*,
neither to see *nor* do. These are but indirect expressions of the will
to live, which has been blocked by the capricious and unholy whim of
death and murder that your Father shared not with you. You have set
yourselves the task of sharing what cannot *be* shared. And while you
think it possible to *learn* to do this, you will not believe all that
*is* possible to learn to do.

<sup>53</sup> The Holy Spirit, therefore, must begin His teaching by showing you
what you can *never* learn. His *message* is not indirect, but He must
introduce the simple truth into a thought system which has become so
twisted and so complex that you cannot *see* that it means nothing. *He*
merely looks at its foundation and dismisses it. But *you*, who cannot
undo what you have made \[nor escape the heavy burden of its dullness
that lies upon your minds\], cannot see *through* it. It deceives you
because you chose to deceive yourselves. Those who choose to *be*
deceived will merely attack direct approaches, which would seem but to
encroach upon deception and strike at it.

