---
chapter: Thirteen
ctitle: From Perception to Knowledge
title: The Guarantee of Heaven
ref: Tx.13.V
---

<sup>37</sup> When we are all united in Heaven, you will value *nothing* that you
value here. For nothing that you value here you value wholly, and so you
do not value it at all. Value is where God placed it, and the value of
what God esteems cannot *be* judged, for it has been *established*. It
is *wholly* of value. It can merely be appreciated or not. To value it
partially is not to *know* its value. In Heaven is everything God valued
and nothing else. Heaven is perfectly unambiguous. Everything is clear
and bright and calls forth *one* response. There is no darkness, and
there is no contrast. There is no variation. There is no interruption.
There is a sense of peace so deep that no dream in this world has ever
brought even a dim imagining of what it is.

<sup>38</sup> Nothing in this world can give this peace, for nothing in this world
is wholly shared. Perfect perception can merely show you what is
*capable* of being wholly shared. It can also show you the *results* of
sharing while you still remember the results of *not* sharing. The Holy
Spirit points quietly to the contrast, knowing that you will finally let
Him judge the difference for you, allowing Him to demonstrate which
*must* be true. He has perfect faith in your final judgment because He
knows that He will make it *for* you. To doubt this would be to doubt
that His mission will be fulfilled. How is this possible, when His
mission is of God?

<sup>39</sup> You whose minds are darkened by doubt and guilt, remember this: God
gave the Holy Spirit to you and gave Him the mission to remove all doubt
and every trace of guilt that His dear Son has laid upon himself. It is
*impossible* that this mission fail. Nothing can prevent what God would
have accomplished from accomplishment. Whatever your reactions to the
Holy Spirit's Voice may be, whatever voice you choose to listen to,
whatever strange thoughts may occur to you, God's Will *is* done. You
*will* find the peace in which He has established you, because He does
not change His Mind. He is invariable as the peace in which you dwell
and of which the Holy Spirit reminds you.

<sup>40</sup> You will not remember change and shift in Heaven. You have need of
contrast only here. Contrast and differences are necessary teaching
aids, for by them you learn what to avoid and what to seek. When you
have learned this, you will find the answer that makes the need for
*any* differences disappear. Truth comes of its own will unto its own.
When you have learned that you *belong* to truth, it will flow lightly
over you without a difference of any kind. For you will need no contrast
to help you realize that this is what you want, and *only* this. Fear
not the Holy Spirit will fail in what your Father has given Him to do.
The Will of God can fail in *nothing*.

<sup>41</sup> Have faith in only this one thing, and it will be sufficient: God
wills you be in Heaven, and nothing can keep *you* from it or *it* from
you. Your wildest misperceptions, your weird imaginings, your blackest
nightmares all mean nothing. They will not prevail against the peace God
wills for you. The Holy Spirit will restore your sanity, because
insanity is *not* the Will of God. If that suffices Him, it is enough
for you. You will not keep what God would have removed, because it
breaks communication with you with whom He would communicate. His voice
*will* be heard.

<sup>42</sup> The Communication Link which God Himself placed within you, joining
your minds with His, *cannot* be broken. You may believe you *want* it
broken, and this belief *does* interfere with the deep peace in which
the sweet and constant communication which God would share with you is
known. Yet His channels of reaching out cannot be wholly closed and
separated from Him. Peace will be yours, because His peace still flows
to you from Him Whose Will *is* peace. You have it *now.* The Holy
Spirit will teach you how to *use* it and, by projecting it, to learn
that it is in you.

<sup>43</sup> God willed you Heaven and will *always* will you nothing else. The
Holy Spirit knows *only* of His Will. There is no chance that Heaven
will not be yours, for God is sure, and what He wills is as sure as He
is. You will learn salvation, because you will learn *how to save*. It
will not be possible to exempt yourself from what the Holy Spirit wills
to teach you. Salvation is as sure as God. His certainty suffices. Learn
that even the darkest nightmare that disturbed the Mind of God's
sleeping Son holds no power over him. He *will* learn the lesson of
awaking. God watches over him, and light surrounds him.

<sup>44</sup> Can God's Son lose himself in dreams when God has placed *within* him
the glad call to waken and be glad? He cannot separate *himself* from
what is *in* him. His sleep will not withstand the call to wake. The
mission of redemption will be fulfilled as surely as the creation will
remain unchanged throughout eternity. You do not have to know that
Heaven is yours to make it so. It *is* so. Yet the Will of God must be
accepted as *your* will to know it.

<sup>45</sup> The Holy Spirit cannot fail to undo *for* you everything you have
learned that teaches you what is not true must be reconciled with truth.
This is the reconciliation which the ego would substitute for your
reconciliation unto sanity and unto peace. The Holy Spirit has a very
different kind of reconciliation in His Mind for you, and one which He
*will* effect as surely as the ego will *not* effect what it attempts.

<sup>46</sup> Failure is of the ego, *not* of God. From Him you *cannot* wander,
and there is no possibility that the plan the Holy Spirit offers to
everyone for the salvation *of* everyone will not be perfectly
accomplished. You *will* be released, and you will not remember anything
you made that was not created *for* you and *by* you in return. For how
can you remember what was *never* true or *not* remember what has always
been? It is this reconciliation with truth, and *only* truth, in which
the peace of Heaven lies.

