---
chapter: Thirteen
ctitle: From Perception to Knowledge
title: The Shadow of Guilt
ref: Tx.13.III
---

<sup>11</sup> Guilt remains the only thing that hides the Father, for guilt is the
attack upon His Son. The guilty *always* condemn, and having done so,
they *will* condemn, linking the future to the past as is the ego's law.
Fidelity unto this law lets no light in, for it *demands* fidelity to
darkness and *forbids* awakening. The ego's laws are strict, and
breaches are severely punished. Therefore give no obedience to its laws,
for they are laws of punishment. And those who follow them believe that
they are guilty, and so they *must* condemn. Between the future and the
past, the laws of God must intervene if you would free yourselves.
Atonement stands between them like a lamp that shines so brightly that
the chain of darkness in which you bound yourselves will disappear.

<sup>12</sup> Release from guilt is the ego's whole undoing. *Make no one fearful*,
for his guilt is yours, and by obeying the ego's harsh commandments, you
bring its condemnation of yourself, and you will not escape the
punishment it offers those who obey it. The ego rewards fidelity to it
with pain, for faith in it *is* pain. And faith can be rewarded only in
terms of the belief in which the faith was placed. Faith *makes* the
power of belief, and where it is invested determines its reward. For
faith is *always* given what is treasured, and what is treasured *is*
returned to you.

<sup>13</sup> The world can give you only what you gave it, for being nothing but
your own projection, it *has* no meaning apart from what you found in it
and placed your faith in. Be faithful unto darkness and you will *not*
see, because your faith will be rewarded as you *gave* it. You will
accept your treasure, and if you place your faith in the past, the
future *will* be like it. Whatever you hold as dear, you think is
*yours.* The power of your *valuing* will make it so.

<sup>14</sup> Atonement brings a re-evaluation of everything you cherish, for it is
the means by which the Holy Spirit can separate the false and the true,
which you have accepted into your minds *without distinction.*
Therefore, *you* cannot value one without the other, and guilt has
become as true *for you* as innocence. You do not believe the Son of God
is guiltless because you see the past and see *him* not. When you
condemn a brother, you are saying, “I who was guilty choose to *remain*
so.” You have denied *his* freedom, and by so doing you have denied the
witness unto *yours.* You could as easily have *freed* him from the past
and lifted from his mind the cloud of guilt that binds him to it. And in
*his* freedom would have been your *own.*

<sup>15</sup> Lay not his guilt upon him, for his guilt lies in his secret that he
thinks that he has done this unto *you*. Would you, then, teach him that
he is *right* in his delusion? The idea that the guiltless Son of God
can attack himself and *make* himself guilty is insane. In *any* form,
in *anyone*, *believe this not*. For sin and condemnation are the same,
and the belief in one is faith in the other, calling for punishment
*instead* of love. *Nothing* can justify insanity, and to call for
punishment upon yourself *must* be insane.

<sup>16</sup> See no one, then, as guilty, and you will affirm the truth of
guiltlessness unto *yourself*. In every condemnation that you offer the
Son of God lies the conviction of your *own* guilt. If you would have
the Holy Spirit make you free of it, accept His offer of Atonement for
all your brothers. For so you learn that it is true for *you*. Remember
always that it is impossible to condemn the Son of God *in part*. Those
whom you see as guilty become the witnesses to guilt in *you*, and you
will *see* it there, for it *is* there until it is undone. Guilt is
*always* in your own mind, which has condemned *itself*. Project it not,
for while you do, it cannot *be* undone. With everyone whom you release
from guilt, great is the joy in Heaven, where the witnesses to your
fatherhood rejoice.

<sup>17</sup> Guilt makes you blind, for while you see one spot of guilt within
you, you will *not* see the light. And by projecting it, the *world*
seems dark and shrouded in your guilt. You throw a dark veil over it and
cannot see it *because you cannot look within.* You are afraid of what
you would see there, but it is *not* there. *The thing you fear is
gone*. If you would look within, you would see only the Atonement,
shining in quiet and in peace upon the altar to your Father.

<sup>18</sup> Do not be afraid to look within. The ego tells you all is black with
guilt within you and bids you *not* to look. Instead, it bids you look
upon your brothers *and see the guilt in them.* Yet this you cannot do
without remaining blind. For those who see their brothers in the dark,
and guilty in the dark in which they shroud them, are too afraid to look
upon the light within. Within you is not what *you* believe is there and
what you put your faith in.

<sup>19</sup> Within you is the holy sign of perfect faith your Father has in you.
He does not value you as you do. He knows Himself and knows the truth in
*you.* He knows *there is no difference*, for He knows not of
differences. Can *you* see guilt where God *knows* there is perfect
innocence? You can *deny* His knowledge, but you cannot *change* it.
Look, then, upon the light He placed within you and learn that what you
feared was there *has been* replaced with love.

