---
chapter: Thirteen
ctitle: From Perception to Knowledge
title: The Role of Healing
ref: Tx.13.II
---

<sup>3</sup> Perfect perception, then, has many elements in common with knowledge,
making transfer to it possible. Yet the last step must be taken by God
because the last step in your redemption, which seems to be in the
future, was accomplished by God in your creation. The separation has not
interrupted it. Creation cannot *be* interrupted. The separation is
merely a faulty formulation of reality with no effect at all. The
miracle, without a function in Heaven, *is* needful here. Aspects of
reality can still be seen, and they will replace aspects of *un*reality.
Aspects of reality can be seen in everything and everywhere. Yet only
God can gather them together by crowning them as one with the final gift
of eternity.

<sup>4</sup> Apart from the Father and the Son, the Holy Spirit has no function. He
is not separate from either, being in the mind of both and knowing that
mind is one. He is a Thought of God, and God has given Him to you
because He has no Thoughts He does not share. His message speaks of
timelessness in time, and that is why Christ's vision looks on
everything with love. Yet even Christ's vision is not His reality. The
golden aspects of reality which spring to light under His loving gaze
are partial glimpses of the Heaven that lies *beyond* them.

<sup>5</sup> This is the miracle of creation; *that* *it is one forever*. Every
miracle you offer to the Son of God is but the true perception of one
aspect of the whole. Though every aspect *is* the whole, you cannot know
this until you see that every aspect is the *same*, perceived in the
same *light* and *therefore* one. Everyone seen *without* the past thus
brings you nearer to the end of time by bringing healed and healing
sight into the darkness and enabling the world to see. For light must
come into the darkened world to make Christ's vision possible even here.
Help Him to give His gift of light to all who think they wander in the
darkness, and let Him gather them into His quiet sight that makes them
one.

<sup>6</sup> They are all the same; all beautiful and equal in their holiness. And
He will offer them unto His Father as they were offered unto Him. There
is *one* miracle, as there is *one* reality. And every miracle you do
contains them all, as every aspect of reality you see blends quietly
into the One Reality of God. The only miracle that ever was is God's
most holy Son, created in the One Reality that is his Father. Christ's
vision is His gift to you. His Being is His Father's gift to Him.

<sup>7</sup> Be you content with healing, for Christ's gift you *can* bestow, and
your Father's gift you *cannot* lose. Offer Christ's gift to everyone
and everywhere, for miracles offered the Son of God through the Holy
Spirit attune you to reality. The Holy Spirit knows your part in the
redemption and who are seeking you and where to find them. Knowledge is
far beyond your individual concern. You, who are part of it and all of
it, need only realize that it is of the Father, *not* of you. Your role
in the redemption leads you to it by reestablishing its oneness in your
minds.

<sup>8</sup> When you have seen your brothers as yourself, you will be *released*
to knowledge, having learned to free yourself of Him Who knows of
freedom. Unite with me under the holy banner of His teaching, and as we
grow in strength, the power of God's Son will move in us, and we will
leave no one untouched and no one left alone. And suddenly time will be
over, and we will all unite in the eternity of God the Father. The holy
light you saw outside yourself in every miracle you offered to your
brothers will be *returned* to you. And *knowing* that the light is *in*
you, your creations will be there with you, as you are in your Father.

<sup>9</sup> As miracles in this world join you to your brothers, so do your
creations establish your fatherhood in Heaven. *You* are the witnesses
to the Fatherhood of God, and He has given you the power to create the
witnesses to \[*yours*, which is as *His.* Deny a brother here, and you
deny the witnesses to\] your fatherhood in Heaven. The miracle which God
created is perfect, as are the miracles which *you* created in His name.
They need no healing, nor do you when you know *them*.

<sup>10</sup> Yet in this world, your perfection is unwitnessed. God knows it, but
*you* do not, and so you do not share His witness to it. Nor do you
witness unto Him, for reality is witnessed to as one. God waits your
witness to His Son and to Himself. The miracles you do on earth are
lifted up to Heaven and to Him. They witness to what you do not know,
and as they reach the gates of Heaven, God will open them. For never
would He leave His own beloved Son outside them and beyond Himself.

