---
chapter: Twelve
ctitle: The Problem of Guilt
title: Attainment of the Real World
ref: Tx.12.VII
---

<sup>58</sup> Sit quietly and look upon the world you see, and tell yourself,

<sup>59</sup> *The real world is not like this. It has no buildings, and there are
no streets where people walk alone and separate. There are no stores
where people buy an endless list of things they do not need. It is not
lit with artificial light, and night comes not upon it. There is no day
that brightens and grows dim. There is no loss. Nothing is there but
shines, and shines forever.*

<sup>60</sup> The world *you* see must be *denied*, for sight of it is costing you
a different kind of vision. *You cannot see both worlds*, for each of
them involves a different kind of seeing and depends on what you
cherish. The sight of one is possible *because* you have denied the
other. Both are not true, yet either one will seem as real to you as the
amount to which you hold it dear. And yet their power is *not* the same
because their real attraction to you is unequal.

<sup>61</sup> You do not really want the world you see, for it has disappointed you
since time began. The homes you built have never sheltered you. The
roads you made have led you nowhere, and no city that you built has
withstood the crumbling assault of time. Nothing you made but has the
mark of death upon it. Hold it not dear, for it is old and tired and
ready to return to dust even as you made it. This aching world has not
the power to touch the living world at all. You could not give it that,
and so although you turn in sadness from it, you cannot find in *it* the
road that leads away from it into another world.

<sup>62</sup> Yet the real world has the power to touch you even here *because you
love it.* And what you call with love *will* come to you. Love *always*
answers, being unable to deny a call for help or not to hear the cries
of pain that rise to it from every part of this strange world you made
but do not want. The only effort you need make to give this world away
in glad exchange for what you did not make is willingness to learn *the
one you made is false.*

<sup>63</sup> You *have* been wrong about the world because you have misjudged
*yourself*. From such a twisted reference point what *could* you see?
All vision starts *with the perceiver* who judges what is true and what
is false. And what he judges false *he does not see.* You who would
judge reality *cannot* see it, for whenever judgment enters, reality has
slipped away. The out of mind is out of sight because what is denied is
there but is not *recognized*. Christ is still there, although you know
Him not. His Being does not depend upon your recognition. He lives
within you in the quiet present and waits for you to leave the past
behind and enter into the world He holds out to you in love.

<sup>64</sup> No one in this distracted world but has seen some glimpses of the
other world about him. Yet while he still lays value on his own, he will
*deny* the vision of the other world, maintaining that he loves what he
loves not and following not the road that love points out. Love leads so
gladly! And as you follow Him, you will rejoice that you have found His
company and learned of Him the joyful journey home. You wait but for
*yourself.* To give this sad world over and exchange your errors for the
peace of God is but *your* will. And Christ will *always* offer you the
Will of God in recognition that you share it with Him.

<sup>65</sup> It is God's Will that nothing touch His Son except Himself, and
nothing else comes nigh unto him. He is as safe from pain as God
Himself, Who watches over him in everything. The world about him shines
with love because God placed him in Himself where pain is not and love
surrounds him without end or flaw. Disturbance of his peace can never
be. In perfect sanity he looks on love, for it is all about him and
within him. He *must* deny the world of pain the instant he perceives
the arms of love around him. And from this point of safety, he looks
quietly about him and recognizes that the world is one with him.

<sup>66</sup> The peace of God passeth your understanding *only* in the past. Yet
here it *is*, and you can understand it *now*. God loves His Son
forever, and His Son *returns* his Father's love forever. The real world
is the way that leads you to remembrance of this one thing that is
wholly true and wholly *yours*. For all else you have lent yourself in
time, and it will fade. But this one thing is *always* yours, being the
gift of God unto His Son. Your *one* reality was given you, and by it
God created you as one with Him.

<sup>67</sup> You will first dream of peace and then awaken to it. Your first
exchange of what you made for what you want is the exchange of
nightmares for the happy dreams of love. In these lie your true
perceptions, for the Holy Spirit corrects the world of dreams, where
*all* perception is. Knowledge needs no correction. Yet the dreams of
love lead *unto* knowledge. In them you see nothing fearful, and because
of this, they are the welcome that you *offer* knowledge. Love waits on
welcome, *not* on time, and the real world is but your welcome of what
always was. Therefore, the call of joy is in it, and your glad response
is your awakening to what you have not lost. Praise, then, the Father
for the perfect sanity of His most holy Son.

<sup>68</sup> Your Father knoweth that you have need of nothing. In Heaven this is
so, for what could you need in eternity? In *your* world you *do* need
things because it is a world of scarcity in which you find yourself
*because* you are lacking. Yet *can* you find yourself in such a world?
Without the Holy Spirit, the answer would be no. Yet because of Him, the
answer is a joyous *yes*! As Mediator between the two worlds, He knows
what you have need of and what will not hurt you. Ownership is a
dangerous concept if it is left to you. The ego wants to *have* things
for salvation, for possession is its law. Possession for its *own* sake
is the ego's fundamental creed, a basic cornerstone in the churches that
it builds unto itself. And at *its* altar it demands you lay *all* of
the things it bids you get, leaving you no joy in them.

<sup>69</sup> Everything that the ego tells you that you need will hurt you. For
although the ego urges you again and again to *get*, it leaves you
nothing, for what you get, it will *demand* of you. And even from the
very hands that grasped it, it will be wrenched and hurled into the
dust. For where the ego sees salvation, it sees *separation*, and so you
lose whatever you have gotten in its name. Therefore ask not of
yourselves what you need, for *you do not know* and your advice unto
yourself *will* hurt you. For what you think you need will merely serve
to tighten up your world *against* the light and render you unwilling to
question the value that this world can really hold for you.

<sup>70</sup> Only the Holy Spirit *knows* what you need. For He will give you all
things that do not block the way to light. And what else *could* you
need? In time He gives you all the things that you need have and will
renew them as long as you have need of them. He will take nothing from
you as long as you have *any* need of it. And yet He knows that
everything you need is temporary and will but last until you step aside
from *all* your needs and learn that all of them *have been* fulfilled.
Therefore He has no investment in the things that He supplies except to
make certain that you will not use them on behalf of lingering in time.
He knows that you are not at home there, and He wills no delay to wait
upon your joyous homecoming.

<sup>71</sup> Leave, then, your needs to Him. He will supply them with no emphasis
at all upon them. What comes to you of Him comes safely, for He will
ensure it never can become a dark spot, hidden in your mind and kept to
hurt you. Under His guidance, you will travel light and journey lightly,
for His sight is ever on the journey's end which is His goal. God's Son
is not a traveler through *outer* worlds. However holy his perception
may become, no world outside himself holds his inheritance. Within
himself he *has* no needs, for light needs nothing but to shine in peace
and from itself to let the rays extend in quiet to infinity.

<sup>72</sup> Whenever you are tempted to undertake a foolish journey that would
lead *away* from light, remember what you really want and say,

<sup>73</sup> *The Holy Spirit leads me unto Christ,<br/>
and where else would I go?<br/>
What need have I but to awake in Him?*

<sup>74</sup> Then follow Him in joy, with faith that He will lead you
safely through all dangers to your peace of mind that this world sets
before you. Kneel not before the altars to sacrifice and seek not what
you will surely lose. Content yourselves with what you will as surely
*keep* and be not restless, for you undertake a quiet journey to the
peace of God, where He would have you be in quietness.

<sup>75</sup> In me you have already overcome *every* temptation that would hold
you back. We walk together on the way to quietness that is the gift of
God. Hold me dear, for what except your brothers *can* you need? We will
restore to you the peace of mind that we must find *together.* The Holy
Spirit will teach you to awaken unto us and to yourself. This is the
only *real* need to be fulfilled in time. Salvation *from* the world
lies only here. My peace I *give* you. *Take* it of me in glad exchange
for all the world has offered but to take away. And we will spread it
like a veil of light across the world's sad face, in which we hide our
brothers *from* the world, and it from them.

<sup>76</sup> We cannot sing redemption's hymn alone. My task is not completed
until I have lifted every voice with mine. And yet it is *not* mine, for
as it is my gift to you, so was it the Father's gift to me, given me
through His Spirit. The sound of it will banish sorrow from the Mind of
God's most holy Son, where it cannot abide. Healing in time *is* needed,
for joy cannot establish its eternal reign where sorrow dwells. You
dwell not here, but in eternity. You travel but in dreams while safe at
home. Give thanks to every part of you that you have taught how to
*remember* you. Thus does the Son of God give thanks unto his Father for
his purity.

