---
chapter: Twelve
ctitle: The Problem of Guilt
title: Finding the Present
ref: Tx.12.VI
---

<sup>45</sup> To perceive truly is to be aware of *all* reality through the
awareness of your own. But for this *no* illusions can rise to meet your
sight, for *all* reality leaves no room for *any* error. This means that
you perceive a brother only as you see him *now*. His past has *no*
reality in the present, and you *cannot* see it. *Your* past reactions
to him are *also* not there, and if it is to them that you react *now*,
you see but an image of him which you made and cherish *instead* of him.
In your questioning of illusions, ask yourself if it is *really* sane to
perceive what *was now.* If you remember the past as you look upon your
brother, you will be unable to perceive the reality that is *now*.

<sup>46</sup> You consider it “natural” to use your past experience as the
reference point from which to *judge* the present. Yet this is
*unnatural* because it is delusional. When you have learned to look upon
everyone with *no reference at all* to the past, either his or yours as
you perceived it, you will be able to learn from what you see *now*. For
the past can cast no shadow to darken the present *unless you are
afraid* *of light.* And only if you are would you choose to bring this
darkness *with* you, and by holding it in your minds, see it as a dark
cloud that shrouds your brothers and conceals their reality from your
sight.

<sup>47</sup> *This darkness is in you*. The Christ revealed to you *now* has no
past, for He is changeless, and in *His* changelessness lies *your*
release. For if He is as He was created, there is no guilt in Him. No
cloud of guilt has risen to obscure Him, and He stands revealed in
everyone you meet because you see Him through *Himself*. To be born
again is to *let the past go* and look without condemnation upon the
present. For the cloud which obscures God's Son to you *is* the past,
and if you would have it past *and gone*, you must not see it *now*. If
you see it now in your delusions, it has *not* gone from you, although
it is not there.

<sup>48</sup> Time can release as well as imprison, depending on whose
interpretation of it you use. Past, present, and future are not
continuous unless you *force* continuity on them. You can *perceive*
them as continuous and make them so for *you.* But do not be deceived
and then believe that this is how it *is*, for to believe that reality
is what you would *have* it be according to your use for it *is*
delusional. You would destroy time's continuity by breaking it into
past, present, and future *for your own purposes*. You would anticipate
the future on the basis of your past experience and plan for it
accordingly. Yet by doing so, you are *aligning* past and future and not
allowing the miracle, which could intervene *between* them, to free you
to be born again.

<sup>49</sup> The miracle enables you to see your brother *without* his past and so
perceive *him* as born again. His errors *are* all past, and by
perceiving him without them, you are *releasing* him. And since his past
is *yours*, you *share* in this release. Let no dark cloud out of *your*
past obscure him from you, for truth lies *only* in the present, and you
will find it if you seek it there. You have looked for it where it is
*not* and therefore have not found it. Learn, then, to seek it where it
*is*, and it will dawn on eyes that see. Your past was made in anger,
and if you use it to attack the present, you will not *see* the freedom
that the present holds. Judgment and condemnation are *behind* you, and
unless you bring them *with* you, you will see that you *are* free of
them.

<sup>50</sup> Look lovingly upon the present, for it holds the *only* things that
are forever true. All healing lies within it because *its* continuity is
real. It extends to all aspects of consciousness *at the same time* and
thus enables them to reach *each other.* The present is before time was
and will be when time is no more. In it is everything that is eternal,
and they are one. Their continuity is timeless, and their communication
is unbroken, for they are not separated by the past. Only the past *can*
separate, and *it* is nowhere.

<sup>51</sup> The present offers you your brothers in the light that would unite
you with them and free you *from* the past. Would you, then, hold the
past *against* them? For if you do, you are choosing to remain in the
darkness that is not there and refusing to accept the light that is
offered you. For the light of perfect vision is freely given as it is
freely received and can be accepted only *without limit*. In this one
still dimension of time, which does not change and where there is no
sight of what you were, you look at Christ and call His witnesses to
shine on you *because you called them forth*. And *they* will not deny
the truth in you because you looked for it in them and *found* it there.

<sup>52</sup> Now is the time of salvation, for now is the *release* from time.
Reach out to all your brothers and touch them with the touch of Christ.
In timeless union with them is *your* continuity, unbroken because it is
wholly shared. God's guiltless Son is *only* light. There is no darkness
in him anywhere, for he is whole. Call all your brothers to witness to
his wholeness, as I am calling you to join with me. Every voice has a
part in the song of redemption, the hymn of gladness and thanksgiving
for the light to the Creator of light. The holy light that shines forth
from God's Son is the witness that his light is of his Father.

<sup>53</sup> Shine on your brothers in remembrance of your Creator, for you will
remember Him as you call forth the witnesses to His creation. Those whom
you heal bear witness to *your* healing, for in their wholeness you will
see your own. And as your hymns of praise and gladness rise to your
Creator, He will return your thanks in His clear answer to your call.
For it can never be that His Son called upon Him and remained
unanswered. His call to you is but your call to Him. And *in* Him you
are answered by His peace.

<sup>54</sup> Children of light, you know not that the light is in you. Yet you
will find it through its witnesses, for having *given* light to them,
they will *return* it. Everyone you see in light brings *your* light
closer to your *own* awareness. Love always leads to love. The sick who
ask for love are grateful for it, and in their joy, they shine with holy
thanks. And this they offer you, who *gave* them joy. They are your
guides to joy, for having received it of you, they would keep it. You
have established them as guides to peace, for you have made it manifest
in them. And *seeing* it, its beauty calls *you* home.

<sup>55</sup> There is a light which this world cannot give. Yet *you* can give it,
as it was given you. And as you give it, it shines forth to call you
from the world and follow it. For this light will attract you as nothing
in this world can do. And you will lay aside the world and find another.
This other world is bright with love, which *you* have given it. And
here will everything remind you of your Father and His Holy Son. Light
is unlimited and spreads across this world in quiet joy. All those you
brought with you will shine on you, and you will shine on them in
gratitude because they brought you here. Your light will join with
theirs in power so compelling that it will draw the others out of
darkness as you look on them.

<sup>56</sup> Awakening unto Christ is following the laws of love of your free will
and out of quiet recognition of the truth in them. The attraction of
light must draw you willingly, and willingness is signified by *giving.*
Those who accept love of you become your willing witnesses to the love
you gave them, and it is *they* who hold it out to *you*. In sleep you
are alone, and your awareness is narrowed to yourself. And that is why
the nightmares come. You dream of isolation *because* your eyes are
closed. You do not *see* your brothers, and in the darkness you cannot
look upon the light you gave to them.

<sup>57</sup> And yet the laws of love are not suspended because you sleep. And you
have followed them through all your nightmares and have been faithful in
your giving, for you were *not* alone. Even in sleep has Christ
protected you, ensuring the real world for you when you wake. In *your*
name He has given *for* you and given *you* the gifts He gave. God's Son
is still as loving as his Father. Continuous *with* his Father, he has
no past apart from Him. So he has never ceased to be his Father's
witness *and his own*. Although he slept, Christ's vision did not leave
him. And so it is that he can call unto himself the witnesses that teach
him that he never slept.

