---
chapter: Twelve
ctitle: The Problem of Guilt
title: The Fear of Redemption
ref: Tx.12.III
---

<sup>10</sup> You may wonder why it is so crucial that you look upon your hatred
and realize its full extent. You may also think that it would be easy
enough for the Holy Spirit to show it to you and dispel it, *without*
the need for you to raise it to awareness yourself. Yet there is one
more complication which you have interposed between yourself and the
Atonement, which you do not yet realize. We have said that no one will
countenance fear if he *recognizes* it. Yet in your disordered state,
you are *not* afraid of fear. You do not like it, but it is not your
desire to attack which *really* frightens you. You are not seriously
disturbed by your hostility. You keep it hidden because you are *more*
afraid of what it covers.

<sup>11</sup> You could look even upon the ego's darkest cornerstone *without* fear
if you did not believe that, *without* the ego, you would find within
yourself something you fear even more. You are *not* afraid of
crucifixion. Your real terror is of *redemption.* Under the ego's dark
foundation is the memory of God, and it is of *this* that you are really
afraid. For this memory would *instantly* restore you to your proper
place, and it is this place that you have sought to *leave.*

<sup>12</sup> Your fear of attack is nothing compared to your fear of love. You
would be willing to look even upon your savage wish to kill God's Son if
you did not believe that it *saves* you from love. For this wish
*caused* the separation. You have protected it because you do not *want*
the separation healed, and you realize that, by *removing* the dark
cloud that obscures it, your love for your Father would impel you to
answer His call and leap into Heaven. You believe that attack is
salvation to prevent you from *this.* For still deeper than the ego's
foundation, and much stronger than it will ever be, is your intense and
burning love of God, and His for you. This is what you *really* want to
hide.

<sup>13</sup> In honesty, is it not harder for you to say “I love” than “I hate”?
You associate love with weakness and hatred with strength, and your own
*real* power seems to you as your real *weakness.* For you could not
control your joyous response to the call of love if you heard it, and
the whole world you think you control *would* vanish. The Holy Spirit,
then, seems to be attacking your fortress, for you would shut out God,
and He does not will to *be* excluded.

<sup>14</sup> You have built your whole insane belief system because you think you
would be helpless in God's Presence, and you would *save* yourself from
His love because you think it would crush you into nothingness. You are
afraid it would sweep you away from yourself and make you little. For
you believe that magnitude lies in defiance and that attack is grandeur.
You think you have made a world which God would destroy; and by loving
Him, which you *do*, you would throw this world away, which you *would*.
Therefore, you have used the world to *cover* your love, and the deeper
you go into the blackness of the ego's foundation, the closer you come
to the love that is hidden there. *And it is this that frightens you.*

<sup>15</sup> You can accept insanity because you made it, but you cannot accept
love because you did *not*. You would rather be slaves of the
crucifixion than Sons of God in redemption. For your *individual* death
is more valued than your living oneness, and what is *given* you is not
so dear as what *you* made. You are more afraid of God than of the ego,
and love cannot enter where it is not welcome. But hatred can, for it
enters of *its* will and cares not for yours.

<sup>16</sup> The reason you must look upon your delusions and not keep them hidden
is that they do *not* rest on their own foundation. In concealment they
appear to do so, and thus they *seem* to be self-sustained. This is the
fundamental illusion on which they rest. For *beneath* them and
concealed as long as *they* are hidden is the loving mind that *thought*
it made them in anger. And the pain in this mind is so apparent when it
is uncovered that its need of healing cannot *be* denied. Not all the
tricks and games you offer it can heal it, for here is the *real*
crucifixion of God's Son.

<sup>17</sup> And yet he is *not* crucified. Here is both his pain *and* his
healing, for the Holy Spirit's vision is merciful, and His remedy is
quick. Do not *hide* suffering from His sight, but bring it gladly to
Him. Lay before His eternal sanity *all* your hurt, and *let* Him heal
you. Do not leave any spot of pain hidden from His light, and search
your minds carefully for any thoughts which you may fear to uncover. For
He will heal every little thought which you have kept to hurt you and
cleanse it of its littleness, restoring it to the magnitude of God.

<sup>18</sup> Beneath all your grandiosity, which you hold so dear, is your real
call for help. For you call for love to your Father as your Father calls
you to Himself. In that place which you have hidden, you will only to
unite with the Father in loving remembrance of Him. You will find this
place of truth as you see it in your brothers, for though they may
deceive themselves, like you they long for the grandeur that is in them.
And perceiving it you will welcome it, and it will be *yours*. For
grandeur is the *right* of God's Son, and *no* illusions can satisfy him
or save him from what he *is.* Only his love is real, and he will be
content *only* with his reality.

<sup>19</sup> Save him from his illusions that you may accept the magnitude of your
Father in peace and joy. But exempt no one from your love, or you will
be hiding a dark place in your mind where the Holy Spirit is not
welcome. And you will exempt *yourself* from His healing power, for by
not offering total love, you will not be healed completely. Healing must
be as complete as fear, for love cannot enter where there is one spot of
fear to mar its welcome.

<sup>20</sup> You who prefer specialness to sanity could not obtain it in your
right minds. You were at peace until you asked for special favor. And
God did not give it, for the request was alien to Him, and you could not
ask this of a Father Who truly loved His Son. Therefore you made of Him
an unloving father, demanding of Him what only such a father could give.
And the peace of God's Son was shattered, for he no longer understood
his Father. He feared what he had made, but still more did he fear his
*real* Father, having attacked his own glorious equality with Him.

<sup>21</sup> In peace he needed nothing and asked for nothing. In war he
*demanded* everything and *found* nothing. For how could the gentleness
of love respond to his demands *except* by departing in peace and
returning to the Father? If the Son did not wish to remain in peace, he
could not remain at all. For a darkened mind cannot live in the light,
and it must seek a place of darkness where it can believe it is where it
is not. God did not allow this to happen. Yet you *demanded* that it
happen and therefore believed that it was so.

<sup>22</sup> To “single out” is to “make alone” and thus *make lonely*. God did
not do this to you. Could He set you apart, *knowing* that your peace
lies in His Oneness? He denied you only your request for pain, for
suffering is not of His creation. Having *given* you creation, He could
not take it *from* you. He could but answer your insane request with a
sane answer which would abide with you in your insanity. \[And this He
did. No one who hears His answer but will give up insanity.\] For His
answer is the reference point *beyond* illusions from which you can look
back on them and *see* them as insane. But seek *this* place, and you
*will* find it, for love is in you and will lead you there.

