---
chapter: Twelve
ctitle: The Problem of Guilt
title: The Two Emotions
ref: Tx.12.V
---

<sup>33</sup> We have said that you have but two emotions, love and fear. One is
changeless but continually exchanged, being offered *by* the eternal
*to* the eternal. In this exchange it is extended, for it *increases* as
it is given. The other has many forms, for the content of individual
illusions differs greatly. Yet they have one thing in common—they are
all insane. They are made of sights which are *not* seen and sounds
which are *not* heard. They make up a private world which *cannot* be
shared. For they are meaningful *only* to their maker, and so they have
no meaning at all. In this world their maker moves alone, for only he
perceives them.

<sup>34</sup> Each one peoples his world with figures from his individual past, and
it is because of this that private worlds *do* differ. Yet the figures
that he sees were *never* real, for they are made up only of *his*
reactions to his brothers and do not include their reactions to *him*.
Therefore he does not *see* that he made them and that they are not
whole. For these figures have no witnesses, being perceived in one
separate mind only.

<sup>35</sup> It is *through* these strange and shadowy figures that the insane
relate to their insane world. For they see *only* those who remind them
of these images, and it is to *them* that they relate. Thus do they
communicate with those who are not there, and it is *they* who answer
them, and no one hears their answer save him who called upon them, and
he alone believes they answered him. Projection makes perception, and
you *cannot* see beyond it. Again and again have men attacked each other
because they saw in them a shadow figure in their *own* private world.
And thus it is that you *must* attack yourself first, for what you
attack is *not* in others. Its only reality is in your *own* mind, and
by attacking others, you are literally attacking what is *not there.*

<sup>36</sup> The delusional can be very destructive, for they do not recognize
that they have condemned *themselves*. They do not wish to die, yet they
will not let condemnation *go.* And so they separate into their private
worlds, where everything is disordered and where what is within appears
to be without. Yet what *is* within they do not see, for the *reality*
of their brothers they *cannot* see.

<sup>37</sup> You have but two emotions, yet in your private world you react to
each of them as though it were the *other*. For love cannot abide in a
world apart, where when it comes it is not recognized. If you see your
own hatred *as* your brother, you are not seeing *him.* Everyone draws
nigh unto what he loves and recoils from what he fears. And you react
with fear to love and draw away from it. Yet fear *attracts* you, and
believing it *is* love, you call it to yourself. Your private world is
filled with the figures of fear you have invited into it, and all the
love your brothers offer you, *you do not see*. As you look with open
eyes upon your world, it *must* occur to you that you have withdrawn
into insanity.

<sup>38</sup> You see what is not there, and you hear what is soundless. Your
behavioral manifestations of emotions are the *opposite* of what the
emotions are. You communicate with no one, and you are as isolated from
reality as if you were alone in all the universe. In your madness, you
overlook reality *completely*, and you see only your *own* split mind
everywhere you look. God calls you and you do not hear, for you are
preoccupied with your own voice. And the vision of Christ is not in your
sight, for you look upon yourself *alone*.

<sup>39</sup> Little children, would you offer *this* to your Father? For if you
offer it to yourself, you *are* offering it to Him. And He will *not*
return it, for it is unworthy of you because it is unworthy of Him. Yet
He *would* release you from it and set you free. His sane answer tells
you that what you have offered yourself is not true, but *His* offering
to you has never changed. You who know not what you do *can* learn what
insanity is and look beyond it. It is given you to learn how to *deny*
insanity and come forth from your private world in peace.

<sup>40</sup> You will see all that you denied in your brothers *because* you
denied it in yourself. For you will love them, and by drawing nigh unto
them, you will draw them to yourself, perceiving them as witnesses to
your reality, which you share with God. I am with *them* as I am with
*you*, and we will draw them from their private worlds, for as we are
united, so would we unite with them. The Father welcomes all of us in
gladness, and gladness is what *we* should offer *Him*. For every Son of
God is given you to whom God gave *Himself.* And it is God to Whom you
must offer them to recognize His gift to *you*.

<sup>41</sup> Vision depends on light, and you cannot see in darkness. Yet in the
darkness in the private world of sleep, you *see* in dreams, although
your eyes are closed. And it is here that what you see you *made.* But
let the darkness go, and all you made you will no longer see, for sight
of it depends upon *denying* vision. Yet from denying vision, it does
not follow that you *cannot* see. But this is what denial *does*, for by
it you *accept* insanity, believing you can make a private world and
rule your *own* perceptions. Yet for this, light *must* be excluded.
Dreams disappear when light has come and you can *see*.

<sup>42</sup> Do not seek vision through *your* eyes, for you *made* your way of
seeing that you might see in darkness, and in this you are deceived.
*Beyond* this darkness and yet still *within* you is the vision of
Christ, Who looks on all in light. Your vision comes from fear, as His
from love. And He sees *for* you as your witness to the real world. He
is the Holy Spirit's manifestation, looking always on the real world and
calling forth its witnesses and drawing them *unto* you. For He loves
what He sees within you, and He would *extend* it. And He will not
return unto the Father until He has extended your perception even unto
Him. And there perception is no more, for He has returned you to the
Father with Him.

<sup>43</sup> You have but two emotions, and one you made and one was given you.
Each is a *way of seeing*, and different worlds arise from their
different visions. See through the vision that is given you, for through
Christ's vision He beholds Himself. And seeing what He is, He knows His
Father. Beyond your darkest dreams, He sees God's guiltless Son within
you, shining in perfect radiance, which is undimmed by your dreams. And
this *you* will see as you look with Him, for His vision is His gift of
love to you, given Him of the Father *for* you.

<sup>44</sup> The Holy Spirit is the light in which Christ stands revealed. And all
who would behold Him can see Him, for they have *asked* for light. Nor
will they see Him *alone*, for He is no more alone than they are.
Because they saw the Son, they have risen in Him to the Father. And all
this will they understand because they looked within and saw beyond the
darkness the Christ in them and *recognized* Him. In the sanity of His
vision, they looked upon themselves with love, seeing themselves as the
Holy Spirit sees them. And *with* this vision of the truth in them came
all the beauty of the world to shine upon them.

