---
chapter: Twelve
ctitle: The Problem of Guilt
title: Healing and Time
ref: Tx.12.IV
---

<sup>23</sup> And now the reason why you are afraid of this course should be
apparent. For this is a course on love because it is about *you*. You
have been told that your function in this world is healing, and your
function in Heaven is creating. The ego teaches that your function on
earth is destruction and that you have no function at all in Heaven. It
would thus destroy you here and bury you here, leaving you no
inheritance except the dust out of which it thinks you were made. As
long as it is reasonably satisfied with you, as its reasoning goes, it
offers you oblivion. When it becomes overtly savage, it offers you hell.

<sup>24</sup> Yet neither oblivion nor hell is as unacceptable to you as Heaven.
For your definition of Heaven *is* hell and oblivion, and the *real*
Heaven is the greatest threat you think you could experience. For hell
and oblivion are ideas which *you* made up, and you are bent on
demonstrating their reality to establish *yours*. If *their* reality is
questioned, you believe that *yours* is. For you believe that *attack*
is your reality and that your destruction is the final proof that you
were *right*.

<sup>25</sup> Under the circumstances, would it not be more *desirable* to have
been wrong, even apart from the fact that you *were* wrong? While it
could perhaps be argued that death suggests there *was* life, no one
would claim that it proves there *is* life. Even the past life which
death might indicate could only have been futile if it must come to this
and *needs* this to prove that it was. You question Heaven, but you do
not question *this*. You could heal and be healed if you *did* question
it. And even though you know not Heaven, might it not be more desirable
than death? You have been as selective in your questioning as in your
perception. An open mind is more honest than this.

<sup>26</sup> The ego has a very strange notion of time, and it is with this notion
that your questioning might well begin. The ego invests heavily in the
past and in the end believes that the past is the *only* aspect of time
that is meaningful. You will remember that we said its emphasis on guilt
enables it to ensure its continuity by making the future *like* the past
and thus avoiding the present. By the notion of *paying* for the past in
the future, the past becomes the *determiner* of the future, making them
continuous *without* an intervening present. For the ego uses the
present *only* as a brief transition to the future, in which it brings
the past *to* the future by interpreting the present in *past* terms.

<sup>27</sup> *Now* has no meaning to the ego. The present merely reminds it of
past hurts, and it reacts to the present as if it *were* the past. The
ego cannot tolerate *release* from the past, and although the past is no
more, the ego tries to preserve its image by responding *as if* it were
present. Thus it dictates reactions to those you meet now from a *past*
reference point, obscuring their present reality. In effect, if you
follow the ego's dictates, you will react to your brothers as though
they were someone *else*, and this will surely prevent you from
perceiving them as they *are*. And you will receive messages from them
out of your *own* past because, by making it real in the present, you
are forbidding yourself to *let it go.* You thus deny yourself the
message of release that every brother offers you *now*.

<sup>28</sup> The shadowy figures from the past are precisely what you must
*escape*. For they are not real and have no hold over you unless you
bring them *with* you. They carry the spots of pain in your minds,
directing you to attack in the present in retaliation for a past that is
no more. And this decision is one of *future* pain. Unless you learn
that past pain is delusional, you are choosing a future of illusions and
losing the endless opportunities which you could find for release in the
present. The ego would *preserve* your nightmares and *prevent* you from
awakening and understanding that they *are* past.

<sup>29</sup> Would you *recognize* a holy encounter if you are merely perceiving
it as a meeting with your own past? For you are meeting no one, and the
*sharing* of salvation, which *makes* the encounter holy, is excluded
from your sight. The Holy Spirit teaches that you always meet *yourself*
and the encounter is holy because *you* are. The ego teaches that you
always encounter your past, and because your dreams *were* not holy, the
future *cannot* be, and the present is without meaning. It is evident
that the Holy Spirit's perception of time is the exact opposite of the
ego's. The reason is equally clear, for they perceive the goal of time
as diametrically opposed.

<sup>30</sup> The Holy Spirit interprets time's purpose as rendering the need for
it unnecessary. Thus does He regard the function of time as temporary,
serving only His teaching function, which is temporary by definition.
*His* emphasis is therefore on the only aspect of time which *can*
extend to the infinite, for *now* is the closest approximation of
eternity which this world offers. It is in the *reality* of now, without
past *or* future, that the beginning of the appreciation of eternity
lies. For only now is *here*, and *it* presents the opportunities for
the holy encounters in which salvation can be found.

<sup>31</sup> The ego, on the other hand, regards the function of time as one of
extending itself *in place* of eternity, for like the Holy Spirit, the
ego interprets the goal of time as its own. The continuity of past and
future under *its* direction is the only purpose the ego perceives in
time, and it closes over the present so that no gap in its *own*
continuity can occur. *Its* continuity, then, would *keep* you in time,
while the Holy Spirit would release you *from* it. It is *His*
interpretation of the means of salvation which you must learn to accept
if you would share His goal of salvation for you.

<sup>32</sup> You too will interpret the function of time as you interpret yours.
If you accept your function in the world of time as healing, you will
emphasize *only* the aspect of time in which healing can occur. For
healing *cannot* be accomplished in the past and *must* be accomplished
in the present to release the *future.* This interpretation ties the
future to the *present* and extends the present rather than the past.
But if you interpret your function as destruction, you will lose sight
of the present and hold on to the past to *ensure* a destructive future.
And time *will* be as you interpret it, for of itself it is *nothing*.

