---
chapter: Twenty Two
ctitle: Salvation and the Holy Relationship
title: The Message of the Holy Relationship
ref: Tx.22.II
---

<sup>5</sup> Let reason take another step. If you attack whom God would heal and
hate the one He loves, then you and your Creator *have* a different
will. Yet if you *are* his will, what you must then believe is that you
are not *yourself*. You can indeed believe this, and you *do.* And you
*have* faith in this and see much evidence on its behalf. And where, you
wonder, does your strange uneasiness, your sense of being disconnected,
and your haunting fear of lack of meaning in yourself arise? It is as
though you wandered in without a plan of any kind except to wander off,
for only that seems certain.

<sup>6</sup> Yet we have heard a very similar description earlier, but it was not
of *you*. And yet this strange idea, which it *does* accurately
describe, you *think* is you. Reason would tell you that the world you
see through eyes which are not yours *must* make no sense to you. To
whom would vision such as this send back its messages? Surely not you,
whose sight is wholly independent of the eyes which look upon the world.
If this is not your vision, what can it show to you? The brain cannot
interpret what *your* vision sees. This you would understand. The brain
interprets to the body, of which it is a part. But what it says, *you*
cannot understand. Yet you have listened to it. And long and hard you
tried to understand its messages. You did not realize it is impossible
to understand what fails entirely to reach you.

<sup>7</sup> You have received no messages at all you understand. For you have
listened to what can never communicate at all. Think, then, what
happened. Denying what you are and firm in faith that you are something
else, this “something else” which you have made to be yourself *became*
your sight. Yet it must be the “something else” which sees, and as *not*
you, *explains* its sight to you. *Your* vision would, of course, render
this quite unnecessary. Yet if your eyes are closed and you have called
upon this thing to lead you, asking it to explain to you the world it
sees, you have no reason not to listen nor to suspect that what it tells
you is not true. Reason would tell you it cannot be true *because* you
do not understand it. God has no secrets. He does not lead you through a
world of misery, waiting to tell you at the journey's end why He did
this to you.

<sup>8</sup> What could be secret from God's Will? Yet you believe that *you* have
secrets. What could your secrets be except *another* will that is your
own, apart from His? Reason would tell you that this is no secret that
need be hidden as a sin. But a mistake indeed! Let not your fear of sin
protect it from correction, for the attraction of guilt is only fear.
Here is the one emotion that you made, whatever it may seem to be. This
is the emotion of secrecy, of private thoughts, and of the body. This is
the one emotion that opposes love and always leads to sight of
differences and loss of sameness. Here is the one emotion that keeps you
blind, dependent on the self you think you made to lead you through the
world it made for you.

<sup>9</sup> Your sight was given you, along with everything that you can
understand. You will perceive no difficulty in understanding what this
vision tells you, for everyone sees only what he thinks he *is.* And
what your sight would show you, you will understand *because* it is the
truth. Only your vision can convey to you what *you* can see. It reaches
you directly without a need to be interpreted to you. What needs
interpretation *must* be alien. Nor will it ever be made understandable
by an interpreter you cannot understand.

<sup>10</sup> Of all the messages you have received and failed to understand, this
course alone is *open* to your understanding and *can* be understood.
This is *your* language. You do not understand it yet, only because your
whole communication is like a baby's. The sounds a baby makes and what
he hears are highly unreliable, meaning different things to him at
different times. Neither the sounds he hears nor sights he sees are
stable yet. But what he hears and does not understand will be his native
tongue, through which he will communicate with those around him, and
they with him. And the strange, shifting ones he sees about him will
become to him his comforters, and he will recognize his home and see
them there with him.

<sup>11</sup> So in each holy relationship is the ability to communicate instead of
separate reborn. Yet a holy relationship, so recently reborn itself from
an unholy relationship and yet more ancient than the old illusion that
it has replaced, *is* like a baby now in its rebirth. Yet in this infant
is your vision returned to you, and he will speak the language both of
you can understand. He is not nurtured by the “something else” you
thought was you. He was not given there, nor was received by anything
except yourself. For no two people can unite except through Christ,
Whose vision sees them one.

<sup>12</sup> Think what is given you, my holy brothers. This child will teach you
what you do not understand and make it plain. For his will be no alien
tongue. He will need no interpreter to you, for it was you who taught
him what he knows *because* you knew it. He could not come to anyone but
you, never to “something else.” Where Christ has entered, no one is
alone, for never could He find a home in separate ones. Yet must He be
reborn into His ancient home, so seeming new and yet as old as He, a
tiny newcomer, dependent on the holiness of your relationship to let Him
live.

<sup>13</sup> Be certain God did not entrust His Son to the unworthy. Nothing but
what is part of Him is worthy of being joined. Nor is it possible that
anything not part of Him *can* join. Communication must have been
restored to those that join, for this they could not do through bodies.
What, then, has joined them? Reason will tell you that they must have
seen each other through a vision not of the body and communicated in a
language the body does not speak. Nor could it be a fearful sight or
sound that drew them gently into one. Rather, in each the other saw a
perfect shelter where his Self could be reborn in safety and in peace.
Such did his reason tell him; such he believed *because* it was the
truth.

<sup>14</sup> Here is the first direct perception that you have made. You made it
through awareness older than perception and yet reborn in just an
instant. For what is time to what was always so? Think what that instant
brought—the recognition that the “something else” you thought was you is
an illusion. And truth came instantly to show you where your Self must
be. It is *denial* of illusions that calls on truth, for to deny
illusions is to recognize that fear is meaningless. Into the holy home,
where fear is powerless, love enters thankfully, grateful that it is one
with you who joined to let it enter.

<sup>15</sup> Christ comes to what is like Himself; the same, not different. For He
is always drawn unto Himself. What is as like Him as a holy
relationship? And what draws you together draws Him to you. Here are His
sweetness and His gentle innocence protected from attack. And here can
He return in confidence, for faith in one another is always faith in
Him. You are indeed correct in looking on each other as His chosen home,
for here you will with Him and with His Father. This is your Father's
Will for you, and yours with His. And who is drawn to Christ is drawn to
God as surely as both are drawn to every holy relationship, the home
prepared for them as earth is turned to Heaven.

