---
chapter: Twenty Two
ctitle: Salvation and the Holy Relationship
title: Your Brother’s Sinlessness
ref: Tx.22.III
---

<sup>16</sup> The opposite of illusions is not disillusionment, but truth. Only to
the ego, to which truth is meaningless, do they appear to be the only
alternatives and different from each other. In truth they are the same.
Both bring the same amount of misery, though each one seems to be the
way to lose the misery the other brings. Every illusion carries pain and
suffering in the dark folds of the heavy garments with which it hides
its nothingness. Yet in these dark and heavy garments are those who seek
illusions covered and hidden from the joy of truth.

<sup>17</sup> Truth is the opposite of illusions because it offers joy. What else
but joy could be the opposite of misery? To leave one kind of misery and
seek another is hardly an escape. To change illusions is to make no
change. The search for joy in misery is senseless, for how could joy be
found in misery? All that is possible in the dark world of misery is to
select some aspects out of it, see them as different, and define the
difference as joy. Yet to perceive a difference where none exists will
surely fail to *make* a difference.

<sup>18</sup> Illusions carry only guilt and suffering, sickness and death to their
believers. The form in which they are accepted is irrelevant. No form of
misery in reason's eyes can be confused with joy. Joy is eternal. You
can be sure indeed that any seeming happiness that does not last is
really fear. Joy does not turn to sorrow, for the eternal cannot change.
But sorrow *can* be turned to joy, for time gives way to the eternal.
Only the timeless must remain unchanged, but everything in time can
change with time. Yet if the change be real and not imagined, illusions
must give way to truth and not to other dreams that are but equally
unreal. This is no difference.

<sup>19</sup> Reason will tell you that the only way to escape from misery is to
recognize it *and* *go the other way*. Truth is the same and misery the
same, but they *are* different from each other in every way, in every
instance, and without exception. To believe that one exception can exist
is to confuse what is the same with what is different. *One* illusion
cherished and defended against the truth makes *all* truth meaningless
and *all* illusions real. Such is the power of belief. It cannot
compromise. And faith in innocence is faith in sin if the belief
excludes one living thing and holds it out apart from its forgiveness.

<sup>20</sup> Both reason and the ego will tell you this, but what they *make* of
it is not the same. The ego will assure you now that it is impossible
for you to see no guilt in anyone. And if this vision is the *only*
means by which escape from guilt can be attained, then the belief in sin
must be eternal. Yet reason looks on this another way, for reason sees
the *source* of an idea as what will make it true or false. This must be
so if the idea is *like* its source. Therefore, says reason, if escape
from guilt was given to the Holy Spirit as His purpose, and by One to
Whom nothing He wills *can* be impossible, the means for its attainment
are *more* than possible. They *must* be there, and you must *have*
them.

<sup>21</sup> This is a crucial period in this course, for here the separation of
you and the ego must be made complete. For if you *have* the means to
let the Holy Spirit's purpose be accomplished, they can be *used*. And
*through* their use will you gain faith in them. Yet to the ego this
must be impossible, and no one undertakes to do what holds no hope of
ever being done. *You* know what your Creator wills is possible, but
what you made believes it is not so. Now must you choose between
yourself and an *illusion* of yourself. *Not* both, but *one*. There is
no point in trying to avoid this one decision. It *must* be made. Faith
and belief can fall to either side, but reason tells you that misery
lies only on one side and joy upon the other.

<sup>22</sup> Forsake not now each other. For you who are the same will not decide
alone nor differently. Either you give each other life or death; either
you are each other's savior or his judge, offering him sanctuary or
condemnation. This course will be believed entirely or not at all. For
it is wholly true or wholly false and cannot be but partially believed.
And you will either escape from misery entirely or not at all. Reason
will tell you that there is no middle ground where you can pause
uncertainly, waiting to choose between the joy of Heaven and the misery
of hell. Until you choose Heaven, you *are* in hell and misery.

<sup>23</sup> There is no part of Heaven you can take and weave into illusions. Nor
is there one illusion you can enter Heaven with. A savior cannot be a
judge, nor mercy condemnation. And vision cannot damn, but only bless.
Whose function is to save will save. *How* he will do it is beyond your
understanding, but *when* must be your choice. For time you made, and
time you *can* command. You are no more a slave to time than to the
world you made.

<sup>24</sup> Let us look closer at the whole illusion that what you made has power
to enslave its maker. This is the same belief that caused the
separation. It is the meaningless idea that thoughts can leave the
thinker's mind, be different from it, and *in opposition* to it. If this
were true, thoughts would not be the mind's extensions but its enemies.
And here we see again another form of the same fundamental illusion we
have seen many times before. Only if it were possible the Son of God
could leave his Father's Mind, make himself different, and oppose His
Will, would it be possible that the self he made and all it made should
be his master.

<sup>25</sup> Behold the great projection, but look on it with the decision that it
must be healed and not with fear. Nothing you made has any power over
you unless you still would be apart from your Creator and with a will
opposed to His. For only if you would believe His Son could be His enemy
does it seem possible that what *you* made is yours. You would condemn
His joy to misery and make Him different. And all the misery you made
has been your own. Are you not *glad* to learn it is not true? Is it not
welcome news to hear not one of the illusions that you made replaced the
truth?

<sup>26</sup> Only *your* thoughts have been impossible. Salvation *cannot* be. It
*is* impossible to look upon your savior as your enemy and recognize
him. Yet it *is* possible to recognize him for what he is if God would
have it so. What God has given to your holy relationship is *there*. For
what He gave the Holy Spirit to give to you, *He gave*. Would you not
look upon the savior that has been given you? And would you not exchange
in gratitude the function of an executioner you gave him for the one he
has in truth? Receive of him what God has given him for you, not what
you tried to give yourself.

<sup>27</sup> Beyond the bodies that you interposed between you and shining in the
golden light which reaches it from the bright endless circle that
extends forever is your holy relationship, beloved of God Himself. How
still it rests, in time and yet beyond, immortal yet on earth. How great
the power that lies in it. Time waits upon its will, and earth will be
as it would have it be. Here is no separate will nor the desire that
*anything* be separate. Its will has no exceptions, and what it wills is
true. Every illusion brought to its forgiveness is gently overlooked and
disappears. For at its center Christ has been reborn to light His home
with vision that overlooks the world. Would you not have this holy home
be yours as well? No misery is here, but only joy.

<sup>28</sup> All you need do to dwell in quiet here with Christ is share His
vision. Quickly and gladly is His vision given to anyone who is but
willing to see his brother sinless. And no one can remain beyond this
willingness if you would be released entirely from all effects of sin.
Would you have partial forgiveness for yourself? Can you reach Heaven
while a single sin still tempts you to remain in misery? Heaven is the
home of perfect purity, and God created it for *you*. Look on your holy
brother, sinless as yourself, and let him lead you there.

