---
chapter: Twenty Two
ctitle: Salvation and the Holy Relationship
title: Freedom and the Holy Spirit
ref: Tx.22.VII
---

<sup>51</sup> Do you want freedom of the body or of the mind? For both you cannot
have. Which do you value? Which is your goal? For one you see as means;
the other, end. And one must serve the other and lead to its
predominance, increasing its importance by diminishing its own. Means
serve the end, and as the end is reached, the value of the means
decreases, eclipsed entirely when they are recognized as functionless.
No one but yearns for freedom and tries to find it. Yet he will seek for
it where he believes it is and can be found. He will believe it possible
of mind or body, and he will make the other serve his choice as means to
find it.

<sup>52</sup> Where freedom of the body has been chosen, the mind is used as means
whose value lies in its ability to contrive ways to achieve the body's
freedom. Yet freedom of the body has no meaning, and so the mind is
dedicated to serve illusions. This is a situation so contradictory and
so impossible that anyone who chooses this has no idea of what *is*
valuable. Yet even in this confusion, so profound it cannot be
described, the Holy Spirit waits in gentle patience, as certain of the
outcome as He is sure of His Creator's love. He knows this mad decision
was made by one as dear to His Creator as love is to itself.

<sup>53</sup> Be not disturbed at all to think how He can change the role of means
and end so easily in what God loves and would have free forever. But be
you rather grateful that *you* can be the means to serve His end. This
is the only service which leads to freedom. To serve this end, the body
must be perceived as sinless because the *goal* is sinlessness. The lack
of contradiction makes the soft transition from means to end as easy as
is the shift from hate to gratitude before forgiving eyes. You *will* be
sanctified by one another, using your bodies only to serve the sinless.
And it *will* be impossible for you to hate what serves what you would
heal.

<sup>54</sup> This holy relationship, lovely in its innocence, mighty in strength,
and blazing with a light far brighter than the sun which lights the sky
you see, is chosen of your Father as a means for His own plan. Be
thankful that it serves yours not at all. Nothing entrusted to it can be
misused, and nothing given it but will be used. This holy relationship
has the power to heal all pain, regardless of its form. Neither of you
alone can serve at all. Only in your joint will does healing lie. For
here *your* healing is and here will you accept Atonement. And in your
healing is the Sonship healed *because* your wills are joined.

<sup>55</sup> Before a holy relationship there is no sin. The form of error is no
longer seen, and reason, joined with love, looks quietly on all
confusion, observing merely, “This was a mistake.” And then the same
Atonement you accepted in your relationship corrects the error and lays
a part of Heaven in its place. How blessed are you who let this gift be
given! Each part of Heaven that you bring is given *you*. And every
empty place in Heaven that you fill again with the Eternal Light you
bring shines now on *you*. The means of sinlessness can know no fear
because they carry only love with them.

<sup>56</sup> Children of peace, the light *has* come to you. The light you bring
you do not recognize, and yet you will remember. Who can deny himself
the vision that he brings to others? And who would fail to recognize a
gift he let be laid in Heaven through himself? The gentle service that
you give the Holy Spirit is service to yourself. You who are now His
means must love all that He loves. And what you bring is your
remembrance of everything that is eternal. No trace of anything in time
can long remain in minds that serve the timeless. And no illusion can
disturb the peace of a relationship which has become the means of peace.

<sup>57</sup> When you have looked upon each other with complete forgiveness from
which no error is excluded and nothing kept hidden what mistake can
there be anywhere you cannot overlook? What form of suffering could
block your sight, preventing you from seeing past it? And what illusion
could there be you will not recognize as a mistake—a shadow through
which you walk completely undismayed? God would let nothing interfere
with those whose wills are His\[. And they will recognize their wills
are His, *because* they serve His Will\] and serve it willingly. And
*could* remembrance of what they are be long delayed?

<sup>58</sup> You will see your value through each other's eyes, and each one is
released as he beholds his savior in place of the attacker who he
thought was there. Through this releasing is the world released. This is
your part in bringing peace. For you have asked what is your function
here and have been answered. Seek not to change it nor to substitute
another goal. \[This one was *given* you and *only* this.\] Accept this
one and serve it willingly, for what the Holy Spirit does with the gifts
you give each other, to whom He offers them, and where and when is up to
Him. He will bestow them where they are received and welcomed. He will
use every one of them for peace. Nor will one little smile or
willingness to overlook the tiniest mistake be lost to anyone.

<sup>59</sup> What can it be but universal blessing to look on what your Father
loves with charity? Extension of forgiveness is the Holy Spirit's
function. Leave this to Him. Let your concern be only that you give to
Him that which can *be* extended. Save no dark secrets that He cannot
use, but offer Him the tiny gifts He can extend forever. He will take
each one and make of it a potent force for peace. He will withhold no
blessing from it nor limit it in any way. He will join to it all the
power that God has given Him to make each little gift of love a source
of healing for everyone. Each little gift you offer to the other lights
up the world. Be not concerned with darkness; look away from it and
toward each other. And let the darkness be dispelled by Him Who knows
the light and lays it gently in each quiet smile of faith and confidence
with which you bless each other.

<sup>60</sup> On your learning depends the welfare of the world. And it is only
arrogance that would deny the power of your will. Think you the Will of
God is powerless? Is this humility? You do not see what this belief has
done. You see yourself as vulnerable, frail, and easily destroyed and at
the mercy of countless attackers more powerful than you. Let us look
straight at how this error came about, for here lies buried the heavy
anchor that seems to keep the fear of God in place, unmovable and solid
as a rock. While this remains, so will it seem to be.

<sup>61</sup> Who can attack the Son of God and *not* attack his Father? How can
God's Son be weak and frail and easily destroyed *unless* his Father is?
You do not see that every sin and every condemnation which you perceive
and justify *is* an attack upon your Father. And that is why it has not
happened nor *could* be real. You do not see that this is your attempt
because you think the Father and the Son are separate. And you *must*
think that they are separate because of fear. For it seems safer to
attack another or yourself than to attack the great Creator of the
universe, whose power you *know.*

<sup>62</sup> If you were one with God and *recognized* this oneness, you would
know His power is *yours*. But you will not remember this while you
believe attack of any kind means anything. It is unjustified in any form
*because* it has no meaning. The only way it could be justified is if
each one of you were separate from the other, and all were separate from
your Creator. For only then would it be possible to attack a part of the
creation without the whole, the Son without the Father, and to attack
another without yourself or hurt yourself without the other feeling
pain. And this belief you *want*. Yet wherein lies its value except in
the desire to attack in safety? Attack is neither safe nor dangerous. It
is *impossible*. And this is so *because* the universe is one. You would
not choose attack on its reality if it were not essential to attack to
see it \[*separate from its Creator*\]. And thus it seems as if love
could attack and become fearful.

<sup>63</sup> Only the *different* can attack. So you conclude *because* you can
attack you *must* be different. Yet does the Holy Spirit explain this
differently. *Because* you are not different, you *cannot* attack.
Either position is a logical conclusion if only the different can
attack. Either could be maintained, but never both. The only question to
be answered to decide which must be true is whether you *are* different.
From the position of what you understand, you seem to be and therefore
can attack. Of the alternatives, this seems more natural and more in
line with your experience. And therefore it is necessary that you have
other experiences more in line with truth to teach you what *is* natural
and true.

<sup>64</sup> This is the function of your holy relationship. For what one thinks
the other will experience with him. What can this mean *except* your
minds are one? Look not with fear upon this happy fact and think not
that it lays a heavy burden on you. For when you have accepted it with
gladness, you will realize that your relationship is a reflection of the
union of the Creator and His Son. From loving minds there *is* no
separation. And every thought in one brings gladness to the other
*because* they are the same. Joy is unlimited because each shining
thought of love extends its being and creates more of itself. There is
no difference anywhere in it, for every thought is like itself.

<sup>65</sup> The light that joins you shines throughout the universe, and because
it joins you, so it makes you one with your Creator. And in Him is all
creation joined. Would you regret you cannot fear alone when your
relationship can also teach the power of love is there, which makes all
fear impossible? Do not attempt to keep a little of the ego with this
gift. For it was given you to be *used* and not obscured. What teaches
you you cannot separate, *denies* the ego. Let truth decide if you be
different or the same and teach you which *is* true.

