---
chapter: Twenty Two
ctitle: Salvation and the Holy Relationship
title: The Branching of the Road
ref: Tx.22.V
---

<sup>38</sup> When you come to the place where the branch in the road is quite
apparent, you cannot go ahead. You *must* go either one way or the
other. For now if you go straight ahead, the way you went before you
reached the branch, you will go *nowhere*. The whole purpose of coming
this far was to decide which branch you will take *now*. The way you
came no longer matters. It can no longer serve. No one who reaches this
far *can* make the wrong decision, but he *can* delay. And there is no
part of the journey that seems more hopeless and futile than standing
where the road branches and not deciding on which way to go.

<sup>39</sup> It is but the first few steps along the right way that seem hard, for
you *have* chosen, although you still may think you can go back and make
the other choice. This is not so. A choice made with the power of Heaven
to uphold it cannot *be* undone. Your way *is* decided. There will be
nothing you will not be told if you acknowledge this.

<sup>40</sup> And so you stand, here in this holy place, before the veil of sin
that hangs between you and the face of Christ. *Let* it be lifted! Raise
it together, for it is but a veil that stands between you. Either alone
will see it as a solid block, nor realize how thin the drapery that
separates you now. Yet it is almost over in your awareness, and peace
has reached you even here before the veil. Think what will happen after!
The love of Christ will light your faces and shine from them into a
darkened world that *needs* the light. And from this holy place He will
return with you, not leaving it nor you. You will become His messengers,
returning Him unto Himself.

<sup>41</sup> Think of the loveliness that you will see who walk with Him! And
think how beautiful will each of you look to the other! How happy you
will be to be together after such a long and lonely journey where you
walked alone. The gates of Heaven, open now for you, will you now open
to the sorrowful. And none who looks upon the Christ in you but will
rejoice. How beautiful the sight you saw beyond the veil which you will
bring to light the tired eyes of those as weary now as once you were.
How thankful will they be to see you come among them, offering Christ's
forgiveness to dispel their faith in sin.

<sup>42</sup> Every mistake you make the other will gently have corrected for you,
for in his sight your loveliness is his salvation which he would protect
from harm. And each will be the other's strong protector from everything
that seems to rise between you. So shall you walk the world with me,
whose message has not yet been given to everyone. For you are here to
let it be *received*. God's offer still is open, yet it waits
acceptance. From you who have accepted it is it received. Into your
joined hands is it safely given, for you who share it have become its
willing guardians and protectors.

<sup>43</sup> To all who share the love of God, the grace is given to be the givers
of what they have received. And so they learn that it is theirs forever.
All barriers disappear before their coming, as every obstacle was
finally surmounted which seemed to rise and block their way before. This
veil you lift together opens the way to truth to more than you. Those
who would let illusions be lifted from their minds are this world's
saviors, walking the world with their Redeemer and carrying His message
of hope and freedom and release from suffering to everyone who needs a
miracle to save him.

<sup>44</sup> How easy is it to offer this miracle to everyone! No one who has
received it for himself could find it difficult. For by receiving it, he
learned it was not given him alone. Such is the function of a holy
relationship—to receive together and give as you received. Standing
before the veil, it still seems difficult. But hold out your joined
hands and touch this heavy-seeming block, and you will learn how easily
your fingers slip through its nothingness. It is no solid wall. And only
an illusion stands between you and the holy Self you share.

