---
chapter: Six
ctitle: Attack and Fear
title: The Message of the Crucifixion
ref: Tx.6.II
---

<sup>4</sup> For teaching purposes, let us consider the crucifixion again. We have
not dwelt on it before because of its fearful connotations. The only
emphasis we laid upon it was that it was *not* a form of punishment.
Nothing, however, can be really explained in negative terms only. There
is a positive interpretation of the crucifixion which is wholly devoid
of fear and therefore wholly benign in what it teaches if it is properly
understood. The crucifixion is nothing more than an extreme example. Its
value, like the value of any teaching device, lies solely in the kind of
learning it facilitates. It can be and has been misunderstood. This is
only because the fearful are apt to perceive fearfully.

<sup>5</sup> I have already told you that you can always call on me to share my
decision and thus *make it stronger*. I also told you that the
crucifixion was the last foolish journey that the Sonship need take and
that it should mean *release* from fear to anyone who understands it.
While we emphasized only the resurrection before, the purpose of the
crucifixion and how it actually *led* to the resurrection was not
clarified at that time. Nevertheless, it has a definite contribution to
make to your own lives, and if you will consider it *without* fear, it
will help you understand your own role as teachers.

<sup>6</sup> You have reacted for years *as if* you were being crucified. This is a
marked tendency of the separated ones, who always refuse to consider
what they have done *to themselves*. Projection means anger, anger
fosters assault, and assault promotes fear. The real meaning of the
crucifixion lies in the *apparent* intensity of the assault of some of
the Sons of God upon another. This, of course, is impossible and must be
fully understood *as* an impossibility. In fact unless it *is* fully
understood as only that, I cannot serve as a real model for learning.

<sup>7</sup> Assault can ultimately be made *only* on the body. There is little
doubt that one *body* can assault another and can even destroy it. Yet
if destruction *itself* is impossible, then anything that is
destructible cannot be *real*. Therefore, its destruction does *not*
justify anger. To the extent to which you believe that it *does*, you
must be accepting false premises *and teaching them to others*. The
message which the crucifixion was intended to teach was that it is not
necessary to perceive *any* form of assault in persecution, because you
cannot *be* persecuted. If you respond with anger, you must be equating
yourself with the destructible and are therefore regarding yourself
insanely.

<sup>8</sup> I have made it perfectly clear that I am like you and you are like me,
but our fundamental equality can be demonstrated only through joint
*decision*. You are free to perceive yourselves as persecuted if you
choose. You might remember, however, when you *do* choose to react that
way, that I *was* persecuted as the world judges and did *not* share
this evaluation for myself. And because I did not share it, I did not
*strengthen* it. I therefore offered a *different* interpretation of
attack and one which I *do* want to share with you. If you will
*believe* it, you will help me to *teach* it.

<sup>9</sup> We have said before, “As you teach, so shall you learn.” If you react
as if you are persecuted, you are *teaching* persecution. This is not a
lesson which the Sons of God should *want* to teach if they are to
realize their own salvation. Rather, teach your own perfect immunity,
which *is* the truth in you, and *know* that it cannot be assailed. Do
not protect it yourselves, or you have believed that it *is* assailable.
You are not asked to *be* crucified, which was part of my own teaching
contribution. You are merely asked to follow my example in the face of
much *less* extreme temptations to misperceive and *not* to accept them
falsely as justifications for anger.

<sup>10</sup> There can *be* no justification for the unjustifiable. Do not believe
there is, and do not *teach* that there is. Remember always that what
you believe you *will* teach. Believe with me, and we will become equal
as teachers. *Your* resurrection is your reawakening. I am the model for
rebirth, but rebirth itself is merely the dawning on your minds of what
is already in them. God placed it there Himself, and so it is true
forever. I believed in it and therefore made it forever true for me.
Help me to teach it to our brothers in the name of the Kingdom of God,
but first believe that it is true for *you*, or you will teach amiss.

<sup>11</sup> My brothers slept during the so-called “agony in the garden,” but I
could not be angry with them because I had learned I could not *be*
abandoned. Peter swore he would never deny me, but he did so three
times. He did offer to defend me with the sword, which I naturally
refused, not being at all in need of bodily protection. I *am* sorry
when my brothers do not share my decision to hear only one voice,
because it weakens them as teachers *and* as learners. Yet I know that
they cannot really betray themselves *or* me and that it is still on
them that I must build my church.

<sup>12</sup> There is no choice in this because only you can *be* the foundation
of God's church. A church is where an altar is, and the presence of the
altar is what *makes* it a church. Any church which does not inspire
love has a hidden altar which is not serving the purpose for which God
intended it. I must found His church on you because you who accept me as
a model are literally my disciples. Disciples are followers, but if the
model they follow has chosen to save them pain in all respects, they are
probably unwise *not* to follow him.

<sup>13</sup> I elected both for your sake *and* mine to demonstrate that the most
outrageous assault as judged by the ego did not matter. As the world
judges these things, but *not* as God *knows* them, I was betrayed,
abandoned, beaten, torn, and finally killed. It was perfectly clear that
this was only because of the projection of others, because I had not
harmed anyone and had healed many. We are still equal as learners, even
though we need not have equal experiences. The Holy Spirit is glad when
you can learn enough from mine to be re-awakened by them. That was their
only purpose, and that is the only way in which I can be perceived as
the Way, the Truth, and the Light.

<sup>14</sup> When you hear only one voice, you are *never* called on to sacrifice.
On the contrary, by enabling yourselves to hear the Holy Spirit in
others, you can learn from their experiences and gain from them
*without* experiencing them yourselves. That is because the Holy Spirit
is one, and anyone who listens is inevitably led to demonstrate His way
for all. You are not persecuted, nor was I. You are not asked to
*repeat* my experiences, because the Holy Spirit, Whom we *share*, makes
this unnecessary. To *use* my experiences constructively, however, you
must still follow my example in how to perceive them.

<sup>15</sup> My brothers and yours are constantly engaged in justifying the
unjustifiable. My one lesson, which I must teach as I learned, is that
no perception which is out of accord with the judgment of the Holy
Spirit *can* be justified. I undertook to show this was true in a very
extreme case merely because it would serve as a good teaching aid to
those whose temptations to give in to anger and assault would *not* be
so extreme. I will with God that none of His Sons should suffer.

<sup>16</sup> Remember that the Holy Spirit is the communication link between God
the Father and His separated Sons. If you will listen to His Voice, you
will know that you cannot either hurt or *be* hurt and that many need
your blessing to help them hear this for themselves. When you perceive
*only* this need in them and do not respond to *any* other, you will
have learned of me and will be as eager to share your learning as I am.
The crucifixion *cannot* be shared, because it is the symbol of
projection, but the resurrection is the symbol of *sharing*, because the
reawakening of every Son of God is necessary to enable the Sonship to
know its wholeness. Only this *is* knowledge.

<sup>17</sup> The message of the crucifixion is \[very simple and\] perfectly
clear:

<sup>18</sup> *Teach* ***only*** *love, for that is what you* ***are.***

<sup>19</sup> If you interpret the crucifixion in any other way, you are using it
as a weapon for assault rather than as the call for peace for which it
was intended.  The Apostles often misunderstood it and always for the
same reason that makes anyone misunderstand anything. Their own
imperfect love made them vulnerable to projection, and out of their own
fear they spoke of the “wrath of God” as His retaliatory weapon. Nor
could they speak of the crucifixion entirely without anger, because
their own sense of guilt had *made* them angry.

<sup>20</sup> There are two glaring examples of upside-down thinking in the New
Testament, whose whole gospel is *only* the message of love. These are
not like the several slips into impatience which I made. I had learned
the Atonement prayer, which I also came to teach, too well to engage in
upside-down thinking myself. If the Apostles had not felt guilty, they
never could have quoted me as saying, “I come not to bring peace but a
sword.” This is clearly the exact opposite of everything I taught.

<sup>21</sup> Nor could they have described my reactions to Judas as they did if
they had really understood me. They would have realized I *could* not
have said, “Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?” unless I
*believed* in betrayal. The whole message of the crucifixion was simply
that I did *not*. The “punishment” which I am said to have called forth
upon Judas was a similar reversal. Judas was my brother and a Son of
God, as much a part of the Sonship as myself. Was it likely that I would
condemn him when I was ready to demonstrate that condemnation is
impossible?

<sup>22</sup> I am very grateful to the Apostles for their teaching and fully aware
of the extent of their devotion to me. Nevertheless, as you read their
teachings, remember that I told them myself that there was much they
would understand later because they were *not* wholly ready to follow me
at the time. I emphasize this only because I do not want you to allow
*any* fear to enter into the thought system toward which I am guiding
you. I do *not* call for martyrs but for *teachers*. No one is
“punished” for sins, and the Sons of God are not sinners.

<sup>23</sup> *Any* concept of “punishment” involves the projection of blame and
*reinforces* the idea that blame is justified. The behavior that results
is a *lesson in blame*, just as all behavior teaches the beliefs which
motivate it. The crucifixion was a complex of behaviors arising out of
clearly opposed thought systems. As such, it \[is\] the perfect symbol
of conflict between the ego and the Son of God. \[It was as much
intrapersonal as interpersonal then, just as it is now, and it is still
just as real. But because it is just as real now, its lesson, too, has
equal reality *when it is learned*.\] I do not need gratitude any more
than I needed protection, but you need to develop your weakened ability
to *be* grateful, or you cannot appreciate God. He does not need your
appreciation, but *you* do.

<sup>24</sup> You cannot love what you do not appreciate, and *fear makes
appreciation impossible*. Whenever you are afraid of what you are, you
do *not* appreciate it and will therefore reject it. As a result, you
will *teach rejection*. The power of the Sons of God is operating all
the time because they were created as creators. Their influence on *each
other* is without limit and *must* be used for their joint salvation.
Each one must learn to teach that all forms of rejection are utterly
meaningless. The separation *is* the notion of rejection. As long as you
*teach* this, you still believe it. This is *not* as God thinks, and you
must think as He thinks if you are to know Him again.

