---
chapter: Six
ctitle: Attack and Fear
title: The Uses of Projection
ref: Tx.6.III
---

<sup>25</sup> Any split in will *must* involve a rejection of part of it, and this
*is* the belief in separation. The wholeness of God, which *is* His
peace, cannot be appreciated *except* by a whole mind which recognizes
the wholeness of God's creation and *by* this recognition knows its
Creator. Exclusion and separation are synonymous, as are separation and
dissociation. We have said before that the separation was and *is*
dissociation and also that, once it had occurred, projection became its
main defense or the device that *keeps it going*. The reason, however,
may not be as clear as you think.

<sup>26</sup> In the ego's use of projection, to which we are obviously referring,
what you project you disown and therefore *do not believe is yours*. You
are *excluding* yourself by the very statement you are making that you
are *different* from the one on whom you project. Since you have also
judged *against* what you project, you continue to attack it because you
have already attacked it *by* projecting it. By doing this
unconsciously, you try to keep the fact that you must have attacked
yourself *first* out of awareness and thus imagine that you have made
yourself safe.

<sup>27</sup> Projection will *always* hurt you. It reinforces your belief in your
own split mind, and its *only* purpose is *to keep the separation
going*. It is *solely* a device of the ego to make you feel *different*
from your brothers and separated from them. The ego justifies this on
the wholly spurious grounds that it makes you seem “better” than they
are, thus obscuring your equality with them still further. Projection
and attack are inevitably related, because projection is *always* a
means of justifying attack. Anger without projection is impossible.

<sup>28</sup> The ego uses projection *only* to distort your perception both of
yourself *and* your brothers. The process begins by excluding something
\[you think\] exists in you which you do not want and leads directly to
excluding you from your brothers. We have learned, however, that there
is another use of projection. Every ability of the ego has a better
counterpart, because its abilities are directed by the mind which has a
better Voice. The Holy Spirit as well as the ego utilizes projection,
but since their goals are opposed, so is the result.

<sup>29</sup> The Holy Spirit begins by perceiving *you* as perfect. *Knowing* this
perfection is shared, He recognizes it in others, thus strengthening it
in both. Instead of anger, this arouses love for both *because it
establishes inclusion*. Perceiving equality, the Holy Spirit perceives
equal needs. This invites Atonement automatically, because Atonement is
the one need which in this world *is* universal. To perceive yourself
this way is the *only* way in which you can find happiness in the world.
That is because it is the acknowledgment that you are *not* in this
world, for the world *is* unhappy.

<sup>30</sup> How else can you find joy in a joyless place *except* by realizing
that you are *not* there? You cannot be anywhere that God did not put
you, and God created you as part of Him. That is both *where* you are
and *what* you are. It is *completely* unalterable. It is total
inclusion. You cannot change it now or ever. It is forever true. It is
not a belief but a *fact*. Anything that God create\[s\] is as true as
He is. Its truth lies only in its perfect inclusion in Him, Who alone
*is* perfect. To deny this in any way is to deny yourself *and* Him
since it is impossible to accept one *without* the other.

<sup>31</sup> The perfect equality of the Holy Spirit's perception is the
counterpart of the perfect equality of God's knowing. The ego's
perception *has* no counterpart in God, but the Holy Spirit remains the
bridge between perception and knowledge. By enabling you to use
perception in a way that *parallels* knowledge, you will ultimately meet
it and *know* it. The ego would prefer to believe that this meeting is
impossible, yet it is *your* perception which the Holy Spirit guides.
You might remember that the human eye perceives parallel lines *as* *if*
they meet in the distance, which is the same as in the future if time
and space are one dimension. Your perception *will* end where it began.
*Everything* meets in God, because everything was created *by* Him and
*in* Him.

<sup>32</sup> God created His Sons by extending His Thought and retaining the
extensions of His Thought in His Mind. *All* His Thoughts are thus
perfectly united within themselves and with each other, because they
were created neither partially nor in part. The Holy Spirit enables you
*to perceive this wholeness now*. You can no more pray for yourselves
alone than you can find joy for yourself alone. Prayer is the
restatement of *inclusion*, directed by the Holy Spirit under the laws
of God. God created you to create. You cannot *extend* His Kingdom until
you know of its wholeness.

<sup>33</sup> Thoughts begin in the mind of the thinker from which they \[extend\]
outward. This is as true of God's thinking as it is of yours. Because
your minds are split, you can also perceive as well as think. Yet
perception cannot escape from the basic laws of mind. You perceive
*from* your mind and extend your perceptions outward. Although
perception of any kind is unnecessary, *you* made it, and the Holy
Spirit can therefore use it well. He can *inspire* perception and lead
it toward God by making it *parallel* to God's way of thinking and thus
guarantee their ultimate meeting. This convergence *seems* to be far in
the future only because your mind is not in perfect alignment with the
idea and therefore *does not want it now*.

<sup>34</sup> The Holy Spirit *uses* time but does *not* believe in it. Coming from
God, He uses everything for good, but He does not *believe* in what is
not true. Since the Holy Spirit is *in* your minds, your minds must also
be able to believe only what is true. The Holy Spirit can speak only for
this because he speaks for God. He tells you to return your whole mind
to God, because it has *never left Him*. If it has never left Him, you
need only perceive it as it is to *be* returned. The full awareness of
the Atonement, then, is the recognition *that the separation never
occurred.* The ego cannot prevail against this because it is an explicit
statement that the *ego* never occurred.

<sup>35</sup> The ego *can* accept the idea that return is necessary because it can
so easily make the idea seem so difficult. Yet the Holy Spirit tells you
that even return is unnecessary because what never happened cannot
involve *any* problem. It does *not* follow, however, that *you* cannot
make the idea of return \[both\] necessary *and* difficult. It is surely
clear, however, that the perfect *need* nothing and *cannot* experience
perfection as a difficult accomplishment, because that is what they
*are.*

<sup>36</sup> This is the way in which you *must* perceive God's creations,
bringing all of your perceptions into the one parallel line which the
Holy Spirit sees. This line is the direct line of communication with God
and lets your mind converge with *His*. There is no conflict anywhere in
this perception, because it means that *all* perception is guided by the
Holy Spirit, Whose Mind is fixed on God. *Only* the Holy Spirit can
resolve conflict, because *only* the Holy Spirit is conflict-free. He
perceives *only* what is true in your mind and extends outward *only* to
what is true in other minds.

<sup>37</sup> The difference between the ego's use of projection and projection as
the Holy Spirit uses it is very simple. The ego projects to *exclude*
and therefore to deceive. The Holy Spirit projects by *recognizing
Himself* in every mind and thus perceives them as *one*. Nothing
conflicts in this perception, because what the Holy Spirit perceives
*is* the same. Wherever He looks He sees Himself, and because He is
united, He offers the whole Kingdom always. This is the one message God
gave *to* Him and for which He must speak, because that is what He *is*.
The peace of God lies in that message, and so the peace of God lies in
*you*.

<sup>38</sup> The great peace of the Kingdom shines in your mind forever, but it
must shine *outward* to make *you* aware of it. The Holy Spirit was
given you with perfect impartiality, and only by perceiving Him
impartially can you perceive Him at all. The ego is legion, but the Holy
Spirit is One. No darkness abides anywhere in the Kingdom, but your part
is only to allow no darkness to abide in your *own* mind. This alignment
with light is unlimited, because it is in alignment with the light of
the world. Each of us *is* the light of the world, and by joining our
minds *in* this light, we proclaim the Kingdom of God together and *as
one*.

