---
chapter: Six
ctitle: Attack and Fear
title: The Only Answer
ref: Tx.6.V
---

<sup>45</sup> Remember that the Holy Spirit is the *Answer, not* the question. The
ego always speaks first because it is capricious and does *not* mean its
maker well. That is because it believes, and correctly, that its maker
may withdraw his support from it at any moment. If it meant you well, it
would be glad, as the Holy Spirit will be glad when He has brought you
home and you no longer need His guidance. The ego does not regard itself
as *part* of you. Herein lies its primary perceptual error, the
foundation of its whole thought system.

<sup>46</sup> When God created you, He made you part of Him. That is why attack
*within* the Kingdom is impossible. *You* made the ego without love, and
so it does not love *you*. You could not remain *within* the Kingdom
without love, and since the Kingdom is love, you believe that you are
*without* it. This enables the ego to regard itself as separate and
*outside* its maker, thus speaking for the part of your mind that
believes you are separate and outside the Mind of God. The ego, then,
raised the first question that was ever asked, but one which it can
never answer. That question, “What are you?” was the beginning of doubt.

<sup>47</sup> The ego has never answered *any* questions since, although it has
raised a great many. The most inventive activities of the ego have never
done more than *obscure the question*, because you *have* the answer and
*the ego is afraid of you*. You cannot understand the conflict until you
fully understand one basic fact that the ego does *not* know. The Holy
Spirit does not speak first, *but He always answers*. Everyone has
called upon Him for help at one time or another and in one way or
another *and has been answered*. Since the Holy Spirit answers truly, He
answers *for all time*, which means that everyone has the answer *now*.

<sup>48</sup> The ego cannot hear the Holy Spirit, but it *does* believe that part
of the same mind that made it is *against* it. It interprets this as a
justification for *attacking* its maker. It believes that the best
defense *is* attack and *wants you to believe it*. Unless you *do*
believe it you will not side with it, and the ego feels badly in need of
allies though *not* of brothers. Perceiving something alien to itself in
your mind, the ego turns to the body, *not* the mind, as its ally,
because the body is *not* part of you. This makes the body the ego's
friend. It is an alliance frankly based on separation. If you *side*
with this alliance, you *will* be afraid, because you are siding with an
alliance of fear.

<sup>49</sup> The ego and the body conspire *against* your minds, and because the
ego realizes that its “enemy” *can* end them both merely by knowing they
are *not* part of him, they join in the attack together. This is perhaps
the strangest perception of all if you consider what it really involves.
The ego, which is *not* real, attempts to persuade the mind, which *is*
real, that the mind is its own learning device and that the learning
device is more real than *it* is. No one in his right mind could
*possibly* believe this, and no one in his right mind *does* believe it.

<sup>50</sup> Hear then the *one* answer of the Holy Spirit to *all* the questions
which the ego raises. You are a Child of God, a priceless part of His
Kingdom, which He created as part of Him. Nothing else exists, and
*only* this is real. You have chosen a sleep in which you have had bad
dreams, but the sleep is not real, and God calls you to awake. There
will be nothing left of your dream when you hear Him, because you *will*
be awake. Your dreams have contained many of the ego's symbols, and they
have confused you. Yet that was only because you were asleep *and did
not know*. When you awake, you will see the truth around you and in you,
and you will no longer believe in dreams because they will have no
reality for you.

<sup>51</sup> Yet the Kingdom and all that you have created there will have great
reality for you, because they are beautiful and true. In the Kingdom,
where you are and what you are is perfectly certain. There is no doubt
there because the first question was never asked. Having finally been
wholly answered, *it has never been*. Being alone lives in the Kingdom,
where everything lives in God without question. The time that was spent
on questioning in the dream has given way to creation and to its
eternity.

<sup>52</sup> *You* are as certain as God because you are as true as He is, but
what was once quite certain in your minds has become only the *ability*
for certainty. The introduction of abilities into being was the
beginning of *un*certainty because abilities are potentials, *not*
accomplishments. Your abilities are totally useless in the presence of
God's accomplishments and also of yours. Accomplishments are results
which *have been* achieved. When they are perfect, abilities are
meaningless. It is curious that the perfect must now be perfected. In
fact, it is impossible. You must remember, however, that when you put
yourselves in an impossible situation, you believed that the impossible
*was* possible.

<sup>53</sup> Abilities must be *developed*, or you cannot use them. This is not
true of anything that God created, but it is the kindest solution
possible to what *you* have made. In an impossible situation, you can
develop your abilities to the point where they can *get you out of it*.
You have a Guide to how to develop them, but you have no *commander*
except yourself. This leaves *you* in charge of the Kingdom with both a
Guide to *find* it and a means to *keep* it. You have a model to follow
who will *strengthen* your command and never detract from it in any way.
You therefore retain the central place in your perceived enslavement, a
fact which *itself* demonstrates that you are *not* enslaved.

<sup>54</sup> You are in an impossible situation only because you thought it was
possible to be in one. You *would* be in an impossible situation if God
showed you your perfection and *proved* to you that you were wrong. This
would demonstrate that the perfect were inadequate to bring *themselves*
to the awareness of their perfection and thus side with the belief that
those who have everything need help and are therefore helpless. This is
the kind of “reasoning” which the ego engages in, but God, Who *knows*
that His creations are perfect, does *not* insult them. This would be as
impossible as the ego's notion that *it* has insulted *Him.*

<sup>55</sup> That is why the Holy Spirit *never* commands. To command is to assume
*in*equality, which the Holy Spirit demonstrates does not exist.
Fidelity to premises is a law of mind, and everything God created is
faithful to His laws. Fidelity to other laws is also possible, however,
not because the laws are true, but because *you made them*. What would
be gained if God proved to you that you have thought insanely? Can God
lose His own certainty? We have frequently stated that what you teach
you *are.* Would you have God teach you that you have sinned? If He
confronted the self you made with the truth He created for you, what
could you be but afraid? You would doubt your sanity, which is the one
thing in which you can *find* the sanity He gave you.

<sup>56</sup> God does not teach. To teach is to imply a lack, which God *knows* is
not there. God is not conflicted. Teaching aims at change, but God
created only the changeless. The separation was not a loss of perfection
but a failure in communication. A harsh and strident form of
communication arose as the ego's voice. It could not shatter the peace
of God, but it *could* shatter *yours.* God did not blot it out, because
to eradicate it would be to attack it. Being questioned, He did not
question. He merely gave the Answer. His Answer is your Teacher.

## a. To Have, Give All to All

<sup>57</sup> Like any good teacher, the Holy Spirit does know more than you do
*now*, but He teaches only to make you *equal* with Him. This is because
you had already taught wrongly, having believed what was not true. *You
did not believe in your own perfection.* Could God teach you that you
had made a split mind, when He knows your mind only as whole? What God
*does* know is that His communication channels are not open to Him so
that He cannot impart His joy and know that His Children are wholly
joyous. This is an ongoing process, not in time, but in eternity. God's
extending outward, though not His completeness, is blocked when the
Sonship does not communicate with Him as one. So He thought, “My
Children sleep and must be awakened.”

<sup>58</sup> How can you wake children better and more kindly than by a gentle
Voice that will not frighten them but will merely remind them that the
night is over and the light has come? You do not inform them that the
nightmares which frightened them so badly were not real because children
*believe* in magic. You merely reassure them that they are safe *now*.
Then you train them to *recognize the difference* between sleeping and
waking, so that they will understand they need not be afraid of dreams.
Then when bad dreams come, they will call on the light *themselves* to
dispel them.

<sup>59</sup> A wise teacher teaches through approach, *not* avoidance. He does
*not* emphasize what you must avoid to escape from harm so much as what
you need to learn to have joy. This is true even of the world's
teachers. Consider the confusion a child would experience if he were
told, “Do not do *this* because it might hurt you and make you unsafe,
but if you do *that* you will escape from harm and be safe, and then you
will not be afraid.” All of this could be included in only three words:
“Do *only* that!” This simple statement is perfectly clear, easily
understood, and very easily remembered.

<sup>60</sup> The Holy Spirit *never* itemizes errors because He does not frighten
children, and those who lack wisdom *are* children. Yet He *always*
answers their call, and His dependability makes *them* more certain.
Children *do* confuse fantasy and reality, and they *are* frightened,
because they do not know the difference. The Holy Spirit makes *no*
distinction among dreams. He merely shines them away. His light is
*always* the call to awake, whatever you have been dreaming. Nothing
lasting lies in dreams, and the Holy Spirit, shining with the light from
God Himself, speaks only for what lasts forever.

<sup>61</sup> When your body and your ego and your dreams are gone, you will know
that *you* will last forever. Many think this is accomplished through
death, but *nothing* is accomplished through death because death *is*
nothing. *Everything* is accomplished through life, and life is of the
mind and *in* the mind. The body neither lives nor dies, because it
cannot contain you who *are* life. If we share the same mind, you can
overcome death *because I did*. Death is an attempt to resolve conflict
by not willing at all. Like any other impossible solution which the ego
attempts, *it will not work*.

<sup>62</sup> God did not make the body because it is destructible and therefore
not of the Kingdom. The body is the symbol of what you *think* you are.
It is clearly a separation device and therefore does not exist. The Holy
Spirit, as always, takes what you have made and translates it into a
learning device *for* you. Again as always, He re-interprets what the
ego uses as an argument *for* separation into a demonstration *against*
it. If the mind can heal the body but the body cannot heal the mind,
then the mind must be *stronger*. Every miracle demonstrates this.

<sup>63</sup> We have said that the Holy Spirit is the *motivation* for miracles.
This is because He always tells you that *only* the mind is real since
*only* the mind *can be shared*. The body *is* separate and therefore
*cannot* be part of you. To be of one mind *is* meaningful, but to be of
one *body* is meaningless. By the laws of mind, then, the *body* is
meaningless. To the Holy Spirit, *there is no order of difficulty in
miracles.* This is *familiar* enough to you by now, but it has not yet
become believable. Therefore, you do not understand it and cannot *use*
it.

<sup>64</sup> We have too much to accomplish on behalf of the Kingdom to let this
crucial concept slip away. It is a real foundation stone of the thought
system I teach and want *you* to teach. You cannot perform miracles
without believing it, because it is a belief in perfect equality. Only
one equal gift *can* be offered to the equal Sons of God, and that is
*full appreciation*. Nothing more and nothing less. Without a range, an
order of difficulty *is* meaningless, and there must *be* no range in
what you offer to each other.

<sup>65</sup> The Holy Spirit, who leads to God, translates communication into
being, just as He ultimately translates perception into knowledge. \[You
*do not lose what you communicate.*\] The ego uses the body for attack,
for pleasure, and for pride. The insanity of this perception makes it a
fearful one indeed. The Holy Spirit sees the body *only* as a means of
*communication* and because communicating is sharing, it becomes
communion. You might argue that fear as well as love can be communicated
and therefore can be shared. Yet this is not so real as it sounds. Those
who communicate fear are promoting attack, and attack always *breaks*
communication, making it impossible.

<sup>66</sup> Egos *do* join together in temporary allegiance but always for *what
each one can get separately.* The Holy Spirit communicates only *what
each one can give to all*. He never takes anything back, because He
wants *you* to keep it. Therefore, His teaching begins with the lesson:

<sup>67</sup> *To **have**, **give** all **to** all*.

<sup>68</sup> This is a very preliminary step, and the only one you must take for
yourself. It is not even necessary that you *complete* the step
yourself, but it *is* necessary that you turn in that direction. Having
chosen to go that way, you place *yourself* in charge of the journey,
where you and *only* you must remain.

<sup>69</sup> This step *appears* to exacerbate conflict rather than resolve it,
because it is the *beginning* step in reversing your perception and
turning it right-side up. This conflicts with the upside-down perception
which you have not yet abandoned, or the change in direction would not
have been necessary. Some people remain at this step for a very long
time, experiencing *very* acute conflict. At this point, many try to
accept the *conflict* rather than take the next step towards its
resolution. Having taken the first step, however, they *will* be helped.
Once they have chosen what they *cannot* complete alone, *they are no
longer alone.*

## b. To Have Peace, Teach Peace to Learn It

<sup>70</sup> All the separated ones have a basic fear of retaliation and
abandonment. This is because they *believe* in attack and rejection, so
this is what they perceive and teach and *learn*. These insane concepts
are clearly the result of their own dissociation and projection. What
you teach you are, but it is quite apparent that you can teach wrongly
and therefore *teach yourselves wrong*. Many thought that *I* was
attacking them, even though it was quite apparent that I was not. An
insane learner learns strange lessons.

<sup>71</sup> What you must understand is that when you do not *share* a thought
system, you *are* weakening it. Those who *believe* in it therefore
perceive this as an attack *on them*. This is because everyone
identifies *himself* with his thought system, and *every* thought system
centers on *what you believe you are*. If the center of the thought
system is true, only truth extends from it. But if a lie is at its
center, only *deception* proceeds from it. All good teachers realize
that only fundamental change will last, but they do not *begin* at that
level. Strengthening *motivation* for change is their first and foremost
goal. It is also their last and final one.

<sup>72</sup> Increasing motivation for change *in the learner* is all that a
teacher *need* do to guarantee change. This is because a change in
motivation *is* a change of mind, and this will inevitably produce
fundamental change, because the mind *is* fundamental. The first step in
the reversal or undoing process, then, is the undoing of the *getting*
concept. Accordingly, the Holy Spirit's first lesson was “to *have*,
*give* all *to* all.” We said that this is apt to increase conflict
temporarily, and we can clarify this still further now.

<sup>73</sup> At this point, the equality of “having” and “being” is not yet
perceived. Until it *is*, “having” appears to be the *opposite* of
“being.” Therefore, the first lesson *seems* to contain a contradiction
since it is being learned *by a conflicted mind.* This *means*
conflicting motivation, and so the lesson *cannot* be learned
consistently as yet. Further, the mind of the learner projects its own
split, and thus does *not* perceive consistent minds in others, making
him suspicious of *their* motivation. This is the real reason why in
many respects the first lesson is the hardest to learn. Still strongly
aware of the ego in himself and responding primarily to the ego in
others, he is being taught to react to both as if what he *does* believe
is *not* true.

<sup>74</sup> Upside-down as always, the ego perceives the first lesson as insane.
In fact this is its only alternative here since the other one, which
would be much *less* acceptable to it, would obviously be that *it* is
insane. The ego's judgment, then, is predetermined by what it *is*,
though no more so than is any other product of thought. The fundamental
change will still occur with the change of mind *in the thinker*.
Meanwhile, the increasing clarity of the Holy Spirit's Voice makes it
impossible for the learner *not* to listen. For a time, then, he *is*
receiving conflicting messages *and accepting both*. This is the classic
“double bind” in communication.

<sup>75</sup> The way *out* of conflict between two opposing thought systems is
clearly *to choose one* and *relinquish the other.* If you *identify*
with your thought system, and you cannot escape this, and if you accept
two thought systems which are in *complete* disagreement, peace of mind
*is* impossible. If you *teach* both, which you will surely do as long
as you *accept* both, you are teaching conflict and *learning* it. Yet
you *do* want peace, or you would not have called upon the Voice for
Peace to help you. His *lesson* is not insane; the *conflict* is.

<sup>76</sup> There can *be* no conflict between sanity and insanity. Only one is
true, and therefore only one is *real*. The ego tries to persuade *you*
that it is up to you to decide which voice is true, but the Holy Spirit
teaches you that truth was created by God, and *your* decision *cannot*
change it. As you begin to realize the quiet power of the Holy Spirit's
Voice *and its perfect consistency*, it *must* dawn on your minds that
you are trying to undo a decision which was made irrevocably *for* you.
That is why we suggested before that there was help in reminding
yourselves to allow the Holy Spirit to decide for God for *you*.

<sup>77</sup> You are *not* asked to make insane decisions, although you are free
to *think* you are. It *must*, however, be insane to believe that it *is
up to you* to decide what God's creations *are*. The Holy Spirit
perceives the conflict exactly as it is. Therefore, His second lesson
is:

<sup>78</sup> *To **have** peace, **teach** peace to **learn** it*.

<sup>79</sup> This is still a preliminary step since *having* and *being* are still
not equated. It is, however, more advanced than the first step, which is
really only a thought *reversal.* The second step is a positive
affirmation of *what you want.* This, then, is a step in the direction
*out* of conflict since it means that alternatives have been considered
and *one* has been chosen as *more desirable.*

<sup>80</sup> Nevertheless, the evaluation “more desirable” still implies that the
desirable has *degrees.* Therefore, although this step is essential for
the ultimate decision, it is clearly *not* the final one. It is clear at
this point that the lack of order of difficulty in miracles has not yet
been accepted, because nothing is difficult that is *wholly* *desired*.
To desire wholly is to *create*, and creating *cannot* be difficult if
God Himself created you *as* a creator. The second step, then, is still
perceptual, although it is a giant step toward the unified perception
which parallels God's knowing.

<sup>81</sup> As you take this step and *hold this direction*, you will be pushing
toward the center of your thought system where the *fundamental* change
will occur. You are only beginning this step now, but you have started
on this way by realizing that *only one way is possible*. You do not yet
realize this consistently, and so your progress is intermittent, but the
second step is easier than the first because it *follows*. The very fact
that you have accepted *that* is a demonstration of your growing
awareness that the Holy Spirit *will* lead you on.

## c. Be Vigilant Only for God and His Kingdom

<sup>82</sup> For your own salvation you must be critical, since your salvation
*is* critical to the whole Sonship. We said before that the Holy Spirit
is evaluative and *must* be. Yet His evaluation does not extend *beyond*
you, or you would share it. In *your* mind, and your mind *only*, He
sorts out the true from the false and teaches you to judge every thought
that you allow to enter your mind in the light of what God *put* there.
Whatever is *in accord* with this light, He retains to strengthen the
Kingdom in *you.* What is *partly* in accord with truth, He accepts and
purifies. But what is *out of accord* entirely, He rejects by judging
*against.* This is how He keeps the Kingdom perfectly consistent and
perfectly unified.

<sup>83</sup> What you must remember, however, is that what the Holy Spirit
rejects, the ego *accepts*. This is because they are in fundamental
disagreement about everything, being in fundamental disagreement about
*what you are*. The ego's beliefs on this crucial issue vary, and that
is why it promotes different moods. The Holy Spirit *never* varies on
this point, and so the *one* mood He engenders is joy. He *protects* it
by rejecting everything that does *not* foster joy, and so He alone can
keep you wholly joyous.

<sup>84</sup> The Holy Spirit does not teach your mind to be critical of other
minds, because He does not want you to teach errors *and learn them
yourselves*. He would hardly be consistent if He allowed you to
*strengthen* what you must learn to *avoid*. In the mind of the
*thinker*, then, He *is* judgmental, but only in order to unify the mind
so it can perceive *without* judgment. This enables the mind to *teach*
without judgment and therefore to learn to *be* without judgment. The
undoing is necessary only in *your* mind so that you cannot project
falsely. God Himself has established what you can project with perfect
safety. Therefore, the Holy Spirit's third lesson is:

<sup>85</sup> *Be vigilant **only** for God and **His** Kingdom*.

<sup>86</sup> This is a major step toward *fundamental* change. Yet it is still a
lesson in thought reversal since it implies that there is something you
must be vigilant *against*. It has advanced far from the first lesson,
which was *primarily* a reversal and also from the second, which was
essentially the identification of what is *more* desirable. *This* step,
which follows from the second as the second follows from the first,
emphasizes the *dichotomy* between the desirable and the undesirable. It
therefore makes the *ultimate* choice inevitable.

<sup>87</sup> While the first step seems to *increase* conflict and the second step
still entails it to some extent, this one calls for *consistent effort
against it*. We said already that you can be as vigilant *against* the
ego as *for* it. This lesson teaches not only that you *can* be, but
that you *must* be. It does not concern itself with order of difficulty
but with *clear cut priority for vigilance*. This step is unequivocal in
that it teaches there must be *no* exceptions, although it does not deny
that the temptation to *make* exceptions will occur. Here, then, your
consistency is called on *despite* chaos. Yet chaos and consistency
*cannot* coexist for long, since they are mutually exclusive.

<sup>88</sup> As long as you must be vigilant against anything, however, you are
not recognizing this mutual exclusiveness and are holding the belief
that you can *choose either one*. By teaching *what* to choose, the Holy
Spirit will ultimately be able to teach you that *you need not choose at
all*. This will finally liberate your will *from* choice and direct it
towards creation *within* the Kingdom. Choosing through the Holy Spirit
will lead you *to* the Kingdom. You create by what you *are*, but this
is what you must learn. The way to learn it is inherent in the third
step, which brings together the lessons implied in the others and goes
beyond them towards real integration.

<sup>89</sup> If you allow yourselves to have in your minds *only* what God put
there, you *are* acknowledging your mind as God created it. Therefore,
you are accepting it *as it is*. Since it is whole, you are teaching
peace *because* you believe in it. The final step will still be taken
*for* you by God, but by the third step the Holy Spirit has *prepared*
you for God. He is *getting you ready* for the translation of having
into being by the very nature of the steps you must take with Him.

<sup>90</sup> You learn first that having rests on *giving* and *not* on getting.
Next you learn that you learn what you *teach* and that you *want to
learn peace*. This is the *condition* for identifying with the Kingdom
since it is the condition *of* the Kingdom. You have believed that you
are *without* the Kingdom and have therefore excluded yourself *from* it
in your belief. It is therefore essential to teach you that you must be
*included* and that the *belief* that you are *not* is the *only* thing
that you must exclude.

<sup>91</sup> The third step is thus one of *protection* for your minds, allowing
you to identify *only* with the center, where God placed the altar to
Himself. We have already said that altars are beliefs, but God and His
creations are *beyond* belief, because they are beyond question. The
Voice for God speaks only for *belief* beyond question, which is the
preparation for *being* without question. As long as belief in God and
His Kingdom is assailed by *any* doubts in your minds, His perfect
accomplishment is *not* apparent to you. This is why you must be
vigilant *on God's behalf*. The ego speaks *against* His creation and
therefore *does* engender doubt. You cannot go *beyond* belief until you
believe fully.

<sup>92</sup> Transfer, which *is* extension, is a measure of learning, because it
is its *measurable result.* This, however, does not mean that what it
transfers *to* is measurable. On the contrary, unless it transfers to
the whole Sonship, which is immeasurable because it was created *by* the
Immeasurable, the learning itself *must* be incomplete. To teach the
whole Sonship *without exception* demonstrates that you *perceive* its
wholeness and have learned that it *is* one. Now you must be vigilant to
*hold* its oneness in your minds because, if you let doubt enter, you
will lose awareness of its wholeness *and will be unable to teach it*.

<sup>93</sup> The wholeness of the Kingdom does *not* depend on your perception,
but your *awareness* of its wholeness *does*. It is only your awareness
which *needs* protection since your being cannot *be* assailed. Yet a
real sense of being *cannot* be yours while you are doubtful of what you
*are*. *This is why vigilance is essential*. Doubts about being must not
enter your mind, or you *cannot* know what you are with certainty.
Certainty is *of* God for *you*. Vigilance is not necessary for truth,
but it *is* necessary against *illusions*.

<sup>94</sup> Truth is *without* illusions and therefore *within* the Kingdom.
Everything *outside* the Kingdom *is* illusion, but you must learn to
accept truth, because you threw it away. You therefore saw yourself *as
if* you were without it. By making another Kingdom which you *valued*,
you did not keep *only* the Kingdom of God in your minds and thus placed
part of your mind *outside* it. What you have made has thus divided your
will and given you a sick mind which *must* be healed. Your vigilance
*against* this sickness *is* the way to heal it. Once your mind is
healed, it radiates health and thereby *teaches* healing. This
establishes you as a teacher who teaches like me. Vigilance was required
of me as much as of you, but remember that those who will to teach the
same thing must be in agreement about what they believe.

<sup>95</sup> The third step, then, is a statement of what you *want* to believe
and entails a willingness *to relinquish everything else*. I told you
that you were just beginning the second step, but I also told you that
the third one *follows* it. The Holy Spirit will enable you to go on if
you follow Him. Your vigilance is the sign that you *want* Him to guide
you. Vigilance does require effort, but only to teach you that effort
*itself* is unnecessary. You have exerted great effort to preserve what
you made *because* it was not true. Therefore, you must now turn your
effort *against* it. Only this can cancel out the *need* for effort and
call upon the *being* which you both *have* and *are*. *This*
recognition is wholly *without* effort since it is *already* true and
*needs* no protection. It is in the perfect safety of God. Therefore
inclusion is total and creation is without limit.

