---
chapter: Six
ctitle: Attack and Fear
title: The Relinquishment of Attack
ref: Tx.6.IV
---

<sup>39</sup> We have used many words as synonymous which are not ordinarily
regarded as the same. We began with having and being and more recently
have used others. Hearing and being are examples, to which we can also
add teaching and being, learning and being and, above all, *projecting*
and being. This is because, as we have said before, every idea begins in
the mind of the thinker and extends outward. Therefore, what extends
*from* the mind *is still in it*, and from what it extends it knows
*itself*. That is its natural talent. The word “knows” is correct here,
even though the ego does *not* know and is not concerned with being at
all.

<sup>40</sup> The Holy Spirit still holds knowledge safe through His impartial
perception. By attacking nothing, He presents no barrier at all to the
communication of God. Thus, being is never threatened. Your Godlike mind
can never *be* defiled. The ego never was and never will be part of it,
but *through* the ego you can hear and teach and learn *what is not
true*. From this, which *you* have made, you have taught yourselves to
believe that you *are not* what you *are.* You *cannot* teach what you
have not learned, and what you teach you strengthen in yourselves
*because* you are sharing it. Every lesson you teach *you* are learning.

<sup>41</sup> That is why you must teach only *one* lesson. If you are to be
conflict-free yourselves, you must learn *only* from the Holy Spirit and
teach *only* by Him. You *are* only love, but when you denied this, you
made what you *are* something you must *learn*. We said before that the
message of the crucifixion was, “Teach only love, for that is what you
*are*.” This is the *one* lesson which is perfectly unified, because it
is the only lesson which *is* one. Only *by* teaching it can you learn
it. “As you teach, so will you learn.” If that is true, and it is true
indeed, you must never forget that what you teach is teaching *you*.
What you project you *believe*.

<sup>42</sup> The only *real* safety lies in projecting only the Holy Spirit
because, as you see His gentleness in others, your *own* mind perceives
*itself* as totally harmless. Once it can accept this fully, it does
*not* see the need to *protect itself.* The protection of God then dawns
upon it, assuring it that it is perfectly safe forever. The perfectly
safe are wholly benign. They bless because they know they *are* blessed.
Without anxiety the mind is wholly kind, and because it *projects*
beneficence, it *is* beneficent.

<sup>43</sup> Safety is *the complete relinquishment of attack*. No compromise is
possible in this. Teach attack in *any* form, and *you have learned it,
and it will hurt you.* Yet your learning is not immortal, and you can
unlearn it by *not teaching it*. Since you cannot *not* teach, your
salvation lies in teaching the exact *opposite* of everything the ego
believes. This is how *you* will learn the truth that will set you free
and keep you so, as others learn it of *you.* The only way to *have*
peace is to *teach* peace. By learning it through projection, it becomes
a part of what you *know*, because you cannot teach what you have
dissociated.

<sup>44</sup> Only thus can you win back the knowledge that you threw away. An idea
which you *share*, you must *have*. It awakens in you through the
conviction of teaching. Remember that, if teaching is being and learning
is being, \[then\] teaching is learning. *Everything* you teach, you are
learning. Teach only love, and learn that love is yours and *you* are
love.

