---
chapter: Four
ctitle: The Root of all Evil
title: Creation and Communication
ref: Tx.4.VIII
---

<sup>94</sup> It should be clear by now that, while the content of any particular
ego-illusion does not matter, it is usually more helpful to correct it
in a specific context. Ego-illusions are *quite* specific, although they
frequently change and although the mind is naturally abstract. The mind
nevertheless becomes concrete voluntarily as soon as it splits. However,
only *part* of it splits, so only *part* of it is concrete. The concrete
part is the same part that believes in the ego because the ego *depends*
on the specific. It is the part that believes your existence means you
are *separate*.

<sup>95</sup> Everything the ego perceives is a separate whole, without the
relationships that imply *being*. The ego is thus *against*
communication except in so far as it is utilized to *establish*
separateness rather than to abolish it. The communication system of the
ego is based on its own thought system, as is everything else it
dictates. Its communication is controlled by its need to protect itself,
and it will disrupt communication when it experiences threat. While this
is always so, individual egos perceive different kinds of threat which
are quite specific in their own judgment. For example, although all
forms of perceived demands may be classified or judged by the ego as
coercive communication which must be disrupted, the response of breaking
communication will nevertheless be to a *specific* person or persons.

<sup>96</sup> The specificity of the ego's thinking, then, results in a spurious
kind of generalization which is really not abstract at all. It will
respond in certain specific ways to *all* stimuli which it perceives as
related. In contrast the Soul reacts in the same way to everything it
knows is true and does not respond at all to anything else. Nor does it
make any attempt to *establish* what is true. It knows that what is true
is everything that God created. It is in complete and direct
communication with every aspect of creation because it is in complete
and direct communication with its Creator.

<sup>97</sup> *This* communication *is* the Will of God. Creation and communication
are synonymous. God created every mind by communicating His Mind to it,
thus establishing it forever as a channel for the reception of His Mind
and Will. Since only beings of a like order can truly communicate, His
creations naturally communicate *with* Him and *like* Him. This
communication is perfectly abstract in that its quality is universal in
application and not subject to *any* judgment, *any* exception, or *any*
alteration. God created you *by* this and *for* this. The mind can
distort its function, but it cannot endow itself with functions it was
not given. That is why the mind cannot totally lose the ability to
communicate, even though it may refuse to utilize it on behalf of being.

<sup>98</sup> Existence as well as being rests on communication. Existence,
however, is *specific* in how, what, and with whom communication is
judged to be worth undertaking. Being is completely without these
distinctions. It is a state in which the mind *is* in communication with
everything that is real, including the Soul. To whatever extent you
permit this state to be curtailed, you are limiting your sense of your
*own* reality, which becomes total only by your recognizing *all*
reality in the glorious context of its *real* relationship to you. This
*is* your reality. Do not desecrate it or recoil from it. It is your
real home, your real temple, and your real Self.

<sup>99</sup> God, Who encompasses *all* being, nevertheless created beings who
have everything individually but who want to share it to increase their
joy. Nothing that is real can be increased *except* by sharing. That is
why God Himself created you. Divine Abstraction takes joy in
application, and that is what creation *means*. “How,” “what,” and “to
whom” are irrelevant because real creation gives everything, since it
can create *only* like itself. Remember that in being there is no
difference between “having” and “being” as there is in existence. In the
state of being, the mind gives everything always.

<sup>100</sup> The Bible repeatedly states that you should praise God. This hardly
means that you should tell Him how wonderful He is. He has no ego with
which to accept such thanks and no perception with which to judge such
offerings. But unless you take your part in the creation, His joy is not
complete because *yours* is incomplete. And *this* He does know. He
knows it in His own Being and its experience of His Son's experience.
The constant *going out* of His love is blocked when His channels are
closed, and He *is* lonely when the minds He created do not communicate
fully with Him.

<sup>101</sup> God *has* kept your kingdom for you, but He cannot share His joy
with you until you know it with your whole mind. Even revelation is not
enough because it is communication *from* God. It is not enough until it
is *shared*. God does not need revelation returned to Him, which would
clearly be impossible, but He *does* want revelation brought to others.
This cannot be done with the actual revelation because its content
cannot be expressed, and it is intensely personal to the mind which
receives it. It can, however, still be returned *by* that mind through
its attitudes to *other* minds which the knowledge from the revelation
brings.

<sup>102</sup> God is praised whenever any mind learns to be wholly helpful. This
is impossible without being wholly harmless because the two beliefs
coexist. The truly helpful are invulnerable because they are *not*
protecting their egos, so that nothing *can* hurt them. Their
helpfulness *is* their praise of God, and He will return their praise of
Him because they are like Him, and they can rejoice together. God goes
out to them and through them, and there is great joy throughout the
Kingdom. Every mind that is changed adds to this joy with its own
individual willingness to share in it. The truly helpful are God's
miracle workers whom I direct until we are all united in the joy of the
Kingdom. I will direct you to wherever you can be truly helpful and to
whoever can follow my guidance through you.

