---
chapter: Four
ctitle: The Root of all Evil
title: Love without Conflict
ref: Tx.4.IV
---

<sup>41</sup> You have never understood what “the Kingdom of Heaven is within you”
means. The reason you have not understood it is because it is *not*
understandable to the ego, which interprets it as if something outside
is inside, and this does not mean anything. The word “within” is
unnecessary. The Kingdom of Heaven *is* you. What else *but* you did the
Creator create, and what else *but* you is His Kingdom? This is the
whole message of the Atonement, a message which in its totality
transcends the sum of its parts. Christmas is not a time; it is a state
of mind. The Christ Mind wills from the Soul, *not* from the ego, and
the Christ Mind *is* yours.

<sup>42</sup> You too have a kingdom which your Soul created. It has *not* ceased
to create because your ego has set you on the road of perception. Your
Soul's creations are no more fatherless than *you* are. Your ego and
your Soul will never be co-creators, but your Soul and *your* Creator
will *always* be. Be confident that your creations are as safe as you
are.

<sup>43</sup> *The Kingdom is perfectly united and perfectly protected,<br/>and the
ego will **not** prevail against it. Amen*.

<sup>44</sup> That was written in that form because it is a good thing to use as a
kind of a prayer in moments of temptation. It is a Declaration of
Independence. You will find it very helpful if you understand it fully.

<sup>45</sup> In its characteristically upside-down way, the ego has taken the
impulses from the superconscious and perceives them as if they arise in
the unconscious. The ego judges what is to be accepted, and the
impulses from the superconscious are unacceptable to it because they
clearly point to the nonexistence of the ego itself. The ego therefore
experiences threat and not only censors but also reinterprets the data.
However, as Freud correctly pointed out, what you have repressed can
retain a very active life *beyond* your awareness.

<sup>46</sup> Repression thus operates to conceal not only the baser impulses but
also the most lofty ones from awareness because *both* are threatening
to the ego and, being concerned primarily with its own preservation in
the face of threat, the ego perceives them *as the same*. The
threat-value of the lofty is actually much greater to the ego because
the pull of God Himself can hardly be equated with the pull of human
appetites. By perceiving them *as* the same, the ego attempts to save
itself from being swept away, as it would surely *be* in the presence
of knowledge.

<sup>47</sup> The upper level of the unconscious thus contains the Call of God as
well as the call of the body. That is why the basic conflict between
love and fear is unconscious; the ego cannot tolerate either and
represses both by resorting to inhibition. Society depends on
inhibiting the latter, but *salvation* depends on *dis*inhibiting the
former. The reason you need *my* help is because you have repressed
your own Guide and therefore need guidance. My role is to separate the
true from the false in your unconscious so it can break through the
barriers the ego has set up and shine into your minds. Against our
united strength, the ego *cannot* prevail.

<sup>48</sup> It should be apparent to you by now why the ego regards the Soul as
its “enemy.” The ego arose from the separation, and its continued
existence depends on *your* continuing belief in the separation. Having
reduced the Soul impulses to the unconscious, the ego has to offer you
some sort of reward for maintaining this belief. All it *can* offer is
a sense of temporary existence, which begins with its *own* beginning
and ends with its *own* ending. It tells you this life is *your*
existence because it *is* its own. Against this sense of temporary
existence the Soul offers you the knowledge of permanence and
unshakable *being*. No one who has experienced the revelation of *this*
can ever fully believe in the ego again. How can its meager offering to
you prevail against the glorious gift of God?

<sup>49</sup> You who identify *with* your egos cannot believe that God loves you.
*You* do not love what you have made, and what you made does not love
*you*. Being made out of the denial of the Father, the ego has no
allegiance to its own maker. You cannot conceive of the real
relationship which exists between God and His Souls because of the
hatred you have for the self *you* have made. You project onto your
*own* idea of yourself the will to separate, which conflicts with the
love you feel for what you made *because* you made it. No human love is
without this ambivalence, and since no ego has experienced love
*without* ambivalence, the concept is beyond its understanding.

<sup>50</sup> Love will enter immediately into *any* mind which truly wants it,
but it *must* want it truly. This means that it wants it *without*
ambivalence, and this kind of wanting is wholly without the ego's
“drive to get.” There is a kind of experience which is so different
from anything the ego can offer that you will never recover. The word
“recover” is used quite literally here—you will never be able to cover
or hide again. It is necessary to repeat here that your belief in
darkness and in hiding *is* why the light cannot enter. The Bible gives
many references to the immeasurable gifts which are *for* you but for
which *you* must ask. This is not a condition as the ego sets
conditions. It is the glorious condition of what you *are*.

<sup>51</sup> No force except your own will is strong enough or worthy enough to
guide you. In this you are as free as God and must remain so forever.
You can never be bound except in honor, and that is always voluntary.
Let us ask the Father in my name to keep you mindful of His love for
you and yours for Him. He has never failed to answer this request
because it asks only for what He has already willed. Those who call
truly are *always* answered. Thou shalt have no other gods before Him
because there *are* none.

<sup>52</sup> It has never really entered your mind to give up every idea you ever
had that *opposes* knowledge. You retain thousands of little scraps of
meanness which prevent the Holy One from entering. Light cannot
penetrate through the walls you make to block it, and it is forever
unwilling to destroy what you have made. No one can see *through* a
wall, but *I* can step around it. Watch your minds for the scraps of
meanness or you will be unable to ask me to do so. I can help you only
as our Father created us. I will love you and honor you and maintain
complete respect for what you have made, but I will neither honor it
nor love it unless it is true.

<sup>53</sup> I will never forsake you any more than God will, but I *must* wait
as long as you choose to forsake yourself. Because I wait in love and
not in impatience, you will surely ask me truly. I will come in
response to a single unequivocal call. Watch carefully and see what it
is you are really asking for. Be very honest with yourself about this,
for we must hide nothing from each other. If you will really try to do
this, you have taken the first step toward preparing your mind for the
Holy One to enter. We will prepare for this together, for once He has
come, you will be ready to help me make other minds ready for Him. How
long will you deny Him His Kingdom?

<sup>54</sup> In your own unconscious, deeply repressed by the ego, is the
declaration of your release. *God has given you everything*. This is
the one fact that means the ego does not exist and which therefore
makes it profoundly afraid. In the ego's language, remember, “to have”
and “to be” are different, but they are identical to the Soul. The Soul
knows that you both *have* everything and *are* everything. Any
distinction in this respect is meaningful only when the idea of
“getting,” which implies a lack, has *already* been accepted. That is
why we made no distinction before between *having* the Kingdom of God
and *being* the Kingdom of God.

<sup>55</sup> The calm being of God's Kingdom, which in your sane mind is
perfectly conscious, is ruthlessly banished from the part of the mind
which the ego rules. The ego is desperate because it opposes literally
invincible odds, whether you are asleep or awake. Consider how much
vigilance you have been willing to exert to protect your ego and how
little you have been willing to expend to protect your higher mind. Who
but the insane would undertake to believe what is not true and then
protect this belief at the *cost* of truth?

