---
chapter: Four
ctitle: The Root of all Evil
title: Right Teaching and Right Learning
ref: Tx.4.II
---

<sup>5</sup> We have spoken of many different human symptoms, and at this level
there is almost endless variation. There is, however, only *one* cause of
all of them. The authority problem *is* “the root of all evil.” Money is
but one of its many reflections and is a reasonably representative
example of the kind of thinking which stems from it. The idea of buying
and selling implies precisely the kind of exchange that the Soul cannot
understand at all because its supply is always abundant and all its
demands are fully met.

<sup>6</sup> Every symptom which the ego has made involves a contradiction in
terms. This is because the mind is split between the ego and the Soul,
so that *whatever* the ego makes is incomplete and contradictory. This
untenable position is the result of the authority problem which, because
it accepts the one inconceivable thought as its premise, can only
produce ideas which are inconceivable. The term “profess” is used quite
frequently in the Bible. To profess is to identify with an idea and
offer the idea to others to be their own. The idea does not lessen; it
becomes *stronger*.

<sup>7</sup> A good teacher clarifies his own ideas and strengthens them by
teaching them. Teacher and pupil are alike in the learning process. They
are in the same order of learning, and unless they *share* their lessons,
they will lack conviction. A good teacher must believe in the ideas
which he professes, but he must meet another condition; he must also
believe in the students to whom he offers his ideas. Many stand guard
over their ideas because they want to protect their thought systems as
they are, and learning means change. Change is always fearful to the
separated ones because they cannot conceive of it as a change towards
*healing* the separation. They *always* perceive it as a change towards
further separation because the separation was their first experience of
change.

<sup>8</sup> You believe that if you allow no change to enter into your ego, your
Soul will find peace. This profound confusion is possible only if one
maintains that the same thought system can stand on two foundations.
*Nothing* can reach the Soul from the ego, and nothing *from* the Soul can
strengthen the ego or reduce the conflict within it. The ego *is* a
contradiction. Man's self and God's Self *are* in opposition. They are
opposed in creation, in will, and in outcome. They are fundamentally
irreconcilable because the Soul cannot perceive and the ego cannot know.
They are therefore *not in communication* and can never *be* in
communication. Nevertheless, the ego can learn because its maker can be
misguided but *cannot* make the totally lifeless out of the life-given.
The Soul need not be taught, but the ego *must*.

<sup>9</sup> The ultimate reason why learning is perceived as frightening is
because learning *does* lead to the relinquishment (*not* destruction) of
the ego to the light of the Soul. This is the change the ego *must* fear
because it does not share my charity. My lesson was like yours, and
because I learned it, I can teach it. I never attack your egos, but I *do*
try to teach you how their thought system[s] arose. When I remind you of
your *true* creation, your egos cannot *but* respond with fear.

<sup>10</sup> Teaching and learning are your greatest strengths now, because you
*must* change your mind and help others change theirs. It is pointless to
refuse to tolerate change because you believe you can demonstrate that
by doing so the separation has not occurred. The dreamer who doubts the
reality of his dream while he is still dreaming is not really healing
the level-split. You *have* dreamed of a separated ego, and you *have*
believed in a world which rests upon it. This is very real to you. You
cannot undo this by doing nothing and *not* changing.

<sup>11</sup> If you are willing to renounce the role of guardian[s] of your
thought system[s] and open [them] to me, I will correct [them] very
gently and lead you home. Every good teacher hopes to give his students
so much of his own thinking that they will one day no longer need him.
This is the one real goal of the parent, teacher, and therapist. This
goal will not be achieved by those who believe that they will *lose* their
child or pupil or patient if they succeed. It is *impossible* to convince
the ego of this because it goes against all of its own laws. But
remember that laws are set up to protect the continuity of the system in
which the law-maker *believes*.

<sup>12</sup> It is natural enough for the ego to try to protect itself once you
have made it, but it is *not* natural for *you* to want to obey its laws
unless you believe in them. The ego cannot make this choice because of
the nature of its origin. *You* can because of the nature of *yours*. Egos
can clash in any situation, but Souls cannot clash at all. If you
perceive a teacher as merely a “larger ego,” you *will* be afraid because
to *enlarge* an ego *is* to increase separation anxiety. I will teach with
you and live with you if you will think with me, but my goal will always
be to absolve you finally from the *need* for a teacher.

<sup>13</sup> This is the *opposite* of the ego-oriented teacher's goal. He is
concerned with the effect of *his* ego on *other* egos and therefore
interprets their interaction as a means of ego preservation. I would not
be able to devote myself to teaching if I believed this, and *you* will
not be a devoted teacher as long as *you* maintain it. I am constantly
being perceived as a teacher either to be exalted or rejected, but I do
not accept either perception for myself.

<sup>14</sup> Your worth is *not* established by your teaching *or* your learning. Your
worth was established by God. As long as you dispute this, *everything*
you do will be fearful, particularly any situation which lends itself to
the “superiority-inferiority” fallacy. Teachers must be patient and
repeat their lessons until they are learned. I am willing to do this
because I have no right to set your learning limits for you. Once
again—*nothing* you do or think or wish or make is necessary to establish
your worth. This point is not debatable except in delusions. Your ego is
*never* at stake because God did *not* create it. Your Soul is never at
stake because He *did*. *Any* confusion on this point is a delusion and no
form of devotion is possible as long as this delusion lasts.

<sup>15</sup> The ego tries to exploit *all* situations into forms of praise for
itself in order to overcome its doubts. It will be doubtful forever, or
rather as long as you believe in it. You who made it *cannot* trust it
because you *know* it is not real. The only *sane* solution is not to try to
change reality, which is indeed a fearful attempt, but to see it as it
*is*. *You* are part of reality, which stands unchanged beyond the reach of
your ego but within easy reach of your Soul. When you are afraid, be
still and *know* that God is real and *you* are His beloved Son in whom He
is well pleased. Do not let your ego dispute this because the ego cannot
know what is as far beyond its reach as you are.

<sup>16</sup> God is *not* the author of fear. *You* are. You have chosen, therefore,
to create unlike Him, and you have made fear for yourselves. You are not
at peace because you are not fulfilling your function. God gave you a
very lofty responsibility which you are not meeting. You *know* this, and
you are afraid. In fact, your egos have chosen to be afraid *instead* of
meeting it. When you awaken you will not be able to understand this
because it is literally incredible. *Do not believe the incredible now*.
Any attempt to increase its believability is merely to postpone the
inevitable.

<sup>17</sup> The word “inevitable” is fearful to the ego but joyous to the Soul.
God *is* inevitable, and you *cannot* avoid Him any more than He can avoid
*you*. The ego is afraid of the Soul's joy because, once you have
experienced it, you will withdraw all protection from the ego and become
totally without the investment in fear. Your investment is great now
because fear is a witness to the separation, and your ego rejoices when
you witness to it. Leave it behind! Do not listen to it, and do not
preserve it. Listen only to God, Who is as incapable of deception as are
the Souls He created.

<sup>18</sup> Release yourselves and release others. Do not present a false and
unworthy picture of yourself to others, and do not accept such a picture
of them yourselves. The ego has built a shabby and unsheltering home for
you because it cannot build otherwise. Do not try to make this
impoverished house stand. *Its* weakness is *your* strength. Only God could
make a home that is worthy of His creations, who have chosen to leave it
empty by their own dispossession. Yet His home will stand forever and is
ready for you when you choose to enter it. Of this you can be wholly
certain. God is as incapable of creating the perishable as the ego is of
making the eternal.

<sup>19</sup> Of your egos you can do nothing to save yourselves or others, but of
your Souls you can do everything for the salvation of both. Humility is
a lesson for the ego, *not* for the Soul. The Soul is beyond humility
because it recognizes its radiance and gladly sheds its light
everywhere. The meek shall inherit the earth because their egos are
humble, and this gives them better perception. The Kingdom of Heaven is
the *right* of the Soul, whose beauty and dignity are far beyond doubt,
beyond perception, and stand forever as the mark of the Love of God for
His creations, who are wholly worthy of Him and *only* of Him. Nothing
else is sufficiently worthy to be a gift for a creation of God Himself.

<sup>20</sup> I will substitute for your ego if you wish but *never* for your Soul. A
father can safely leave a child with an elder brother who has shown
himself responsible, but this involves no confusion about the child's
origin. The brother can protect the child's body and his ego, which are
*very* closely related, but he does not confuse *himself* with the father
because he does this, although the child may. I can be entrusted with
your body and your ego simply because this enables you *not* to be
concerned with them and lets *me* teach you their unimportance. I could
not understand their importance to *you* if I had not once been tempted to
believe in them myself.

<sup>21</sup> Let us undertake to learn this lesson together, so we can be free of
them together. I need devoted teachers who share my aim of healing the
mind. The Soul is far beyond the need of your protection or mine.
Remember this:

<sup>22</sup> *In this world you **need** not have tribulation **because**<br/>I
have overcome the world*.

<sup>23</sup> *That* is why you should be of good cheer.

