---
chapter: Four
ctitle: The Root of all Evil
title: True Rehabilitation
ref: Tx.4.IX
---

<sup>103</sup> Every mind which is split needs rehabilitation. The medical
orientation to rehabilitation emphasizes the body, while the vocational
orientation stresses the ego. The “team” approach generally leads more
to confusion than to anything else because it is too often misused as a
way of exerting the ego's domination over other egos, rather than as a
real experiment in the cooperation of minds. Rehabilitation as a
movement is an improvement over the overt neglect of those in need of
help, but it is often little more than a painful attempt on the part of
the halt to lead the blind.

<sup>104</sup> The ego is likely to fear broken bodies because it cannot tolerate
them. The ego cannot tolerate ego weakness either without ambivalence
because it is afraid of its own weakness as well as the weakness of its
chosen home. When it is threatened, the ego blocks your natural impulse
to help, placing you under the strain of divided will. You may then be
tempted to withdraw to allow your ego to recover and to gain enough
strength to be helpful again on a basis limited enough *not* to threaten
your ego but too limited to give *you* joy. Those with broken bodies are
often looked down on by the ego because of its belief that nothing but a
perfect body is worthy as its *own* temple.

<sup>105</sup> A mind that recoils from a hurt body is in great need of
rehabilitation itself. *All* symptoms of hurt need true helpfulness, and
whenever they are met with this, the mind that so meets them heals
*itself*. Rehabilitation is an attitude of praising God as He Himself
knows praise. He offers praise to you, and you must offer it to others.
The chief handicaps of the clinicians lie in their attitudes to those
whom their egos perceive as weakened and damaged. *By* these
evaluations, they have weakened and damaged their own helpfulness and
have thus set their own rehabilitation back. Rehabilitation is *not*
concerned either with the ego's fight for control or its need to avoid
and withdraw. You can do much on behalf of your own rehabilitation *and*
that of others if in a situation calling for healing you think of it
this way:

<sup>106</sup> *I am here **only** to be truly helpful.<br/>
I am here to represent Christ, Who sent me.<br/>
I do **not** have to worry about what to say or what to do<br/>
because He Who sent me will direct me.<br/>
I am content to be wherever He wishes, knowing He goes there with me.<br/>
I will be healed as I let Him teach me to heal*.

