---
chapter: Four
ctitle: The Root of all Evil
title: The Ego-Body Illusion
ref: Tx.4.VI
---

<sup>69</sup> *All* things work together for good. There are *no* exceptions except
in the ego's judgment. Control is a central factor in what the ego
permits into consciousness and one to which it devotes its maximum
vigilance. This is *not* the way a balanced mind holds together. *Its*
control is unconscious. The ego is further off balance by keeping its
primary *motivation* unconscious and raising control rather than
sensible judgment to predominance. The ego has every reason to do this
according to the thought system which gave rise to it and which it
serves. Sane judgment would inevitably judge *against* the ego and must
be obliterated *by* the ego in the interest of its self-preservation.

<sup>70</sup> A major source of the ego's off-balanced state is its lack of
discrimination between impulses from God and from the body. Any thought
system which makes this confusion *must* be insane. Yet this demented
state is *essential* to the ego, which judges only in terms of threat or
non-threat *to itself*. In one sense the ego's fear of the idea of God
is at least logical, since this idea *does* dispel the ego. Fear of
dissolution from the Higher Source, then, makes *some* sense in
ego-terms. But fear of the body, with which the ego identifies so
closely, is more blatantly senseless.

<sup>71</sup> The body is the ego's home by its own election. It is the only
identification with which the ego feels safe, because the body's
vulnerability is its own best argument that you *cannot* be of God. This
is the belief that the ego sponsors eagerly. Yet the ego hates the body
because it does not accept the idea that the body is *good* enough to be
its home. Here is where the mind becomes actually dazed. Being told by
the ego that it is really part of the body and that the body is its
protector, the mind is also constantly informed that the body can *not*
protect it. This, of course, is not only accurate but perfectly obvious.

<sup>72</sup> Therefore the mind asks, “Where can I go for protection?” to which
the ego replies, “Turn to me.” The mind, and not without cause, reminds
the ego that it has itself insisted that it *is* identified with the
body, so there is no point in turning to it for protection. The ego has
no real answer to this because there *is* none, but it *does* have a
typical solution. It obliterates the *question* from the mind's
awareness. Once unconscious, the question can and does produce
uneasiness, but it cannot be answered because it cannot be *asked*. This
is the question which *must* be asked: “Where am I to go for
protection?” Even the insane ask it unconsciously, but it requires real
sanity to ask it consciously.

<sup>73</sup> When the Bible says, “Seek and ye shall find,” it does not mean that
you should seek blindly and desperately for something you would not
recognize. Meaningful seeking is consciously undertaken, consciously
organized, and consciously directed. The goal must be formulated clearly
*and kept in mind*. As a teacher with some experience, let me remind you
that learning and *wanting* to learn are inseparable. All learners learn
best when they believe that what they are trying to learn is of *value*
to them. However, values in this world are hierarchical, and not
everything you may want to learn has lasting value.

<sup>74</sup> Indeed, many of the things you want to learn are chosen *because*
their value will not last. The ego thinks it is an advantage not to
commit itself to *anything* that is eternal because the eternal *must*
come from God. Eternalness is the one function which the ego has tried
to develop but has systematically failed. It may surprise you to learn
that had the ego wished to do so it could have made the eternal because,
as a product of the mind, it *is* endowed with the power of its own
creator. However, the *decision* to do this, rather than the ability to
do it, is what the ego cannot tolerate. That is because the decision,
from which the ability would naturally develop, would necessarily
involve accurate perception, a state of clarity which the ego, fearful
of being judged truly, *must* avoid.

<sup>75</sup> The results of this dilemma are peculiar, but no more so than the
dilemma itself. The ego has reacted characteristically here as elsewhere
because mental illness, which is *always* a form of ego involvement, is
not a matter of reliability as much as of validity. The ego compromises
with the issue of the eternal, just as it does with all issues that
touch on the real question in any way. By compromising in connection
with all *tangential* questions, it hopes to hide the real question *and
keep it out of mind*. The ego's characteristic busyness with
non-essentials is for precisely that purpose.

<sup>76</sup> Consider the alchemist's age-old attempts to turn base metal into
gold. The one question which the alchemist did not permit himself to ask
was, “What *for*?” He could not ask this because it would immediately
become apparent that there was no sense in his efforts even if he
succeeded. If gold became more plentiful, its value would decrease, and
his own purpose would be defeated. The ego has countenanced some strange
compromises with the idea of the eternal, making many odd attempts to
relate the concept to the *un*important in an effort to satisfy the mind
without jeopardizing itself. Thus, it has permitted minds to devote
themselves to the possibility of perpetual *motion*, but *not* to
perpetual thoughts.

<sup>77</sup> Ideational preoccupations with problems set up to be incapable of
solution are also favorite ego devices for impeding the strong-willed
from making real learning progress. The problems of squaring the circle
and carrying pi to infinity are good examples. A more recent ego attempt
is particularly noteworthy. The idea of preserving the *body* by
suspension, thus giving it the kind of limited immortality which the ego
can tolerate, is among its more recent appeals to the mind. It is
noticeable, however, that in all these diversionary tactics, the one
question which is *never* asked by those who pursue them is, “What
*for*?”

<sup>78</sup> This is the question which *you* must learn to ask in connection with
*everything* your mind wishes to undertake. What is the purpose?
Whatever it is, you cannot doubt that it will channelize your efforts
automatically. When you make a decision of purpose, then, you have made
a decision about your future effort, a decision which will remain in
effect unless you change the *decision*.

<sup>79</sup> Psychologists are in a good position to realize that the ego is
capable of making and accepting as real some very distorted
associations. The confusion of sex with aggression and the resulting
behavior, which is perceived as the same for both, serves as an example.
This is “understandable” to the psychologist and does not produce
surprise. The lack of surprise, however, is *not* a sign of
understanding. It is a symptom of the psychologist's ability to accept
as reasonable a compromise which is clearly senseless—to attribute it to
the mental illness of the patient rather than his own and to limit his
questions about both the patient *and* himself to the trivial.

<sup>80</sup> Such relatively minor confusions of the ego are not among its more
profound misassociations, although they do reflect them. Your egos have
been blocking the more important questions which your minds *should*
ask. You do not understand a patient while you yourselves are willing to
limit the questions you raise about *his* mind because you are also
accepting these limits for *yours*. This makes you unable to heal him
*and* yourselves. Be always unwilling to adapt to *any* situation in
which miracle-mindedness is unthinkable. That state in itself is enough
to demonstrate that the perception is wrong.

