---
chapter: Four
ctitle: The Root of all Evil
title: The Constant State
ref: Tx.4.VII
---

<sup>81</sup> It cannot be emphasized too often that correcting perception is
merely a temporary expedient. It is necessary to do so only because
misperception is a block to knowledge, while accurate perception is a
stepping-stone *towards* it. The whole value of right perception lies in
the inevitable judgment which it entails that it *is* unnecessary. This
removes the block entirely. You may ask how this is possible as long as
you appear to be living in this world, and since this is a sensible
question, it has a sensible answer. You must be careful, however, that
you really understand the question. What *is* the “you” who are living
in this world?

<sup>82</sup> Immortality is a constant state. It is as true now as it ever was or
ever will be because it implies *no change at all*. It is not a
continuum nor is it understood by being compared to an opposite.
Knowledge never involves comparisons. That is its essential difference
from everything else the mind can grasp. “A little knowledge” is not
dangerous except to the ego. Vaguely it senses threat, and being unable
to realize that “a little knowledge” is a meaningless phrase since “all”
and “a little” in this context are the same, the ego decides that, since
“all” is impossible, the fear does not lie there. “A little,” however,
is a scarcity concept, and *this* the ego understands well. “A little,”
then, is perceived as the real threat.

<sup>83</sup> The essential thing to remember is that the ego *does not recognize*
the real source of its perceived threat, and if *you* associate yourself
with the ego, *you* do not perceive the whole situation as it is. Only
your allegiance to it gives the ego *any* power over you.

<sup>84</sup> We have spoken of the ego as if it were a separate thing acting on
its own. This was necessary to persuade you that you cannot dismiss it
lightly and must realize how much of your thinking is ego-directed. We
cannot safely let it go at that, however, or you will regard yourselves
as necessarily conflicted as long as you are here, or more properly, as
long as you *believe* that you are here.

<sup>85</sup> The ego is nothing more than a *part* of your belief about
yourselves. Your other life has continued without interruption and has
been and always will be totally unaffected by your attempts to
dissociate. The ratio of repression and dissociation varies with the
individual ego-illusion, but dissociation is always involved or you
would not believe that you *are* here. In learning to escape from the
illusions you have made, your great debt to each other is something you
must never forget. It is exactly the same debt that you owe to me.
Whenever you react egotistically towards each other, you are throwing
away the graciousness of your indebtedness and the holy perception it
would produce.

<sup>86</sup> The term “holy” can be used here because as you learn how much you
*are* indebted to the whole Sonship, which *includes* me, you come as
close to knowledge as perception ever can. The gap is then so small that
knowledge can easily flow across it and obliterate it forever. You have
very little trust in me as yet, but it will increase as you turn more
and more often to me *instead* of your egos for guidance. The results
will convince you increasingly that your choice in turning to me is the
only sane one you can make. No one who has learned from experience that
one choice brings peace and joy while another brings chaos and disaster
needs much conditioning.

<sup>87</sup> The ego cannot withstand the conditioning process because the process
itself *demonstrates* that there is another way. Conditioning by rewards
has always been more effective than conditioning by pain because pain is
an ego-illusion and can never induce more than a temporary effect. The
rewards of God, however, are immediately recognized as eternal. Since
this recognition is made by you and *not* the ego, the recognition
*itself* establishes that you and your ego *cannot* be identical. You
may believe that you have already accepted the difference, but you are
by no means convinced as yet. The very fact that you are preoccupied
with the idea of escaping *from* the ego shows this.

<sup>88</sup> You *cannot* escape from the ego by humbling it or controlling it or
punishing it. Remember that the ego and the Soul *do not know* each
other. The separated mind cannot maintain the separation *except* by
dissociating. Having done this, it utilizes repression against all truly
natural impulses, not because the *ego* is a separate thing, but because
you want to believe that *you* are. The ego is a device for maintaining
this belief, but it is still only *your* willingness to use the device
that enables it to endure.

<sup>89</sup> My trust in you is greater than yours in me at the moment, but it
will not always be that way. Your mission is very simple. You have been
chosen to live so as to demonstrate that you are *not* an ego. I repeat
that I do not choose God's channels wrongly. The Holy One shares my
trust and always approves my Atonement decisions because my will is
never out of accord with His. I have told you before that I am in charge
of the whole Atonement. This is *only* because I completed my part in it
as a man and can now complete it through other men. My chosen receiving
and sending channels cannot fail because I will lend them *my* strength
as long as theirs is wanting.

<sup>90</sup> I will go with you to the Holy One, and through *my* perception, *He*
can bridge the little gap. Your gratitude to *each other* is the only
gift I want. I will bring it to God for you, knowing that to know your
brother *is* to know God. A little knowledge is an all-encompassing
thing. If you are grateful to each other, you are grateful to God for
what He created. Through your gratitude, you can come to know each
other, and one moment of real recognition makes all men your brothers
because they are all of your Father. Love does not conquer all things,
but it *does* set all things right. Because you are all the Kingdom of
God, I can lead you back to your own creations, which you do not yet
know. What has been dissociated is still there.

<sup>91</sup> As you come closer to a brother, you *do* approach me and, as you
withdraw from him, *I* become distant to you. Your giant step forward
was to insist on a “collaborative venture.” This does not go against the
true spirit of meditation; it is inherent in it. Meditation is a
collaborative venture with God. It *cannot* be undertaken successfully
by those who disengage themselves from the Sonship because they are
disengaging themselves from me. God will come to you *only* as you will
give Him to your brothers. Learn first of them, and you will be ready to
hear God as you hear them. That is because the function of love is one.

<sup>92</sup> How can you teach someone the value of something he has deliberately
thrown away? He must have thrown it away because he did not value it.
You can only show him how miserable he is without it and bring it near
very slowly, so he can learn how his misery lessens as he approaches it.
This conditions him to associate his misery with its absence and to
associate the opposite of misery with its presence. It gradually becomes
desirable as he changes his mind about its worth.

<sup>93</sup> I am conditioning you to associate misery with the ego and joy with
the Soul. You have conditioned yourselves the other way around. A far
greater reward, however, will break through any conditioning if it is
repeatedly offered whenever the old habit pattern is broken. You are
still free to choose, but can you really *want* the rewards of the ego
in the presence of the rewards of God?

