---
chapter: Four
ctitle: The Root of all Evil
title: The Ego and False Autonomy
ref: Tx.4.III
---

<sup>24</sup> You have asked lately how the mind could ever have made the ego. This
is a perfectly reasonable question; in fact, the best question you could
ask. There is, however, no point in giving an historical answer, because
the past does not matter in human terms, and history would not exist if
the same errors were not being repeated in the present. Abstract thought
applies to knowledge, because knowledge is completely impersonal and
examples are irrelevant to its understanding. Perception, however, is
always specific and therefore quite concrete.

<sup>25</sup> Each man makes one ego for himself, although it is subject to
enormous variation because of its instability, and one for everyone he
perceives, which is equally variable. Their interaction is a process
which literally alters both, because they were not made either *by* or
*with* the unalterable. It is particularly important to realize that
this alteration can and does occur as readily when the interaction takes
place *in the mind* as when it involves physical presence. *Thinking*
about another ego is as effective in changing relative perception as is
physical interaction. There could be no better example of the fact that
the ego is an idea, though not a reality-based thought.

<sup>26</sup> Your own present state is a good example of how the mind made the
ego. You *do* have knowledge at times, but when you throw it away, it is
as if you never had it. This willfulness is so apparent that one need
only perceive it to see that it *does* happen. If it can occur that way
in the present, why is it surprising that it occurred that way in the
past? Psychology rests on the principle of the continuity of behavior.
Surprise is a reasonable response to the unfamiliar but hardly to
something that has occurred with such persistence. I am using your
present state \[as an example\] of how the mind *can* work, provided you
fully recognize that it *need* not work that way. Why are you surprised
that something happened in the dim past when it is so clearly happening
right now?

<sup>27</sup> You forget the love that animals have for their own offspring and
the need they feel to protect them. This is because they regard them as
part of themselves. No one disowns something he regards as a very real
part of himself. Man reacts to his ego much as God does to His Souls:
with love, protection, and great charity. The reaction of man to the
self he made is not at all surprising. In fact it duplicates in many
ways how he will one day react to his *real* creations, which are as
timeless as he is. The question is not *how* man responds to his ego,
but what he believes he *is*.

<sup>28</sup> Belief is an ego function, and as long as your origin is open to
belief at all, you *are* regarding it from an ego viewpoint. \[That is
why the Bible quotes me as saying “Ye believe in God, believe also in
me.” Belief *does* apply to me, because I am the teacher of the ego.\]
When teaching is no longer necessary, you will merely *know* God.
Belief that there *is* another way is the loftiest idea of which ego
thinking is capable. That is because it contains a hint of recognition
that the ego is *not* the self. Undermining the ego's thought system
*must* be perceived as painful, even though this is anything but true.
Babies scream in rage if you take away a knife or a scissors, even
though they may well harm themselves if you do not. The speed-up has
placed you in the same position.

<sup>29</sup> You are *not* prepared, and in this sense you *are* babies. You have
no sense of real self-preservation and are very likely to decide that
you need precisely what would hurt you most. Whether you know it now or
not, however, you *have* willed to cooperate in a concerted and very
commendable effort to become both harm*less* and help*ful*, two
attributes which *must* go together. Your attitudes, even toward this,
are necessarily conflicted, because *all* attitudes are ego-based. This
will not last. Be patient awhile and remember that the outcome is as
certain as God.

<sup>30</sup> Only those who have a real and lasting sense of abundance *can* be
truly charitable. This is quite obvious when you consider the concepts
involved. To the ego, to give anything implies that you will do without
it. When you associate giving with sacrifice, then, you give only
because you believe that you are somehow getting something better so
that you can do without the thing you give. “Giving to get” is an
inescapable law of the ego, which *always* evaluates itself in relation
to other egos and is therefore continually preoccupied with the
scarcity principle which gave rise to it. This is the meaning of
Freud's “reality principle” since Freud thought of the ego as very weak
and deprived, capable of functioning *only* as a thing in need.

<sup>31</sup> The “reality principle” of the ego is not real at all. The ego is
forced to perceive the “reality” of other egos because it cannot
establish the reality of *itself*. In fact, its whole perception of
other egos *as* real is only an attempt to convince itself that *it* is
real. “Self esteem” in ego terms means nothing more than that the ego
has deluded itself into accepting its reality and is therefore
temporarily less predatory. This “self esteem” is *always* vulnerable
to stress, a term which actually refers to a condition in which the
delusion of the ego's reality is threatened. This produces either ego
deflation or ego inflation, resulting in either withdrawal or attack.

<sup>32</sup> The ego literally lives by comparisons. This means that equality is
beyond its grasp and charity becomes impossible. The ego *never* gives
out of abundance, because it was made as a *substitute* for it. That is
why the concept of “getting” arose in the ego's thought system. All
appetites are “getting” mechanisms, representing the ego's need to
confirm itself. This is as true of bodily appetites as it is of the
so-called “higher” ego needs. Bodily appetites are *not* physical in
origin. The ego regards the body as its home and *does* try to satisfy
itself through the body, but the *idea* that this is possible is a
decision of the ego, which is completely confused about what is
*really* possible. This accounts for its erratic nature.

<sup>33</sup> The ego believes it is completely on its own, which is merely
another way of describing how it originated. This is such a fearful
state that it can only turn to other egos and try to unite with them in
a feeble attempt at identification or attack them in an equally feeble
show of strength. It is *not* free, however, to consider the validity
of the premise itself, because this premise is its *foundation*. The
ego *is* the belief of the mind that it is completely on its own. Its
ceaseless attempts to gain the Soul's acknowledgment and thus to
establish its own existence are utterly useless.

<sup>34</sup> The Soul in its knowledge is unaware of the ego. It does not attack
it; it merely cannot conceive of it at all. While the ego is equally
unaware of the Soul, it *does* perceive itself as rejected by
“something” which is greater than itself. This is why self-esteem in
ego terms *must* be a delusion. The creations of God do not create
myths, although the creative efforts of man *can* turn to mythology. It
can do so, however, only under one condition; what man then makes is no
longer creative. Myths are entirely perceptions and are so ambiguous in
form and so characteristically good and evil in nature that the most
benevolent of them is not without fearful components, if only by
innuendo.

<sup>35</sup> Myths and magic are closely associated in that myths are usually
related to the ego origins and magic to the powers which the ego
ascribes to itself. Every mythological system includes some account of
“the creation” and associates this with its particular perception of
magic. The “battle for survival” is nothing more than the ego's
struggle to preserve itself and its interpretation of its own
beginning. This beginning is always associated with physical birth,
because no one maintains that the ego existed before that point in
time. The religiously ego-oriented believe that the Soul existed before
and will continue to exist afterwards, after a temporary lapse in ego
life. Some actually believe that the Soul will be punished for this
lapse, even though in reality it could not possibly know anything about
it.

<sup>36</sup> The term “salvation” does *not* apply to the Soul, which is not in
danger and does not need to be salvaged. Salvation is nothing more than
“right-mindedness,” which is not the One-Mindedness of the Soul, but
which must be accomplished before One-Mindedness can be restored.
Right-mindedness dictates the next step automatically, because right
perception is uniformly without attack, so that wrong-mindedness is
obliterated. The ego cannot survive without judgment and is laid aside
accordingly. The mind then has only *one* direction in which it can
move. The direction which the mind will take is always automatic,
because it cannot *but* be dictated by the thought system to which the
mind adheres.

<sup>37</sup> Every thought system has internal consistency, and this provides the
basis for the continuity of behavior. However, this is a matter of
reliability and not validity. “Reliable behavior” is a meaningful
perception as far as ego thinking goes. However, “valid behavior” is an
expression which is inherently contradictory, because validity is an
*end* and behavior is a *means*. These cannot be combined logically,
because when an end has been attained, the means for its attainment are
no longer meaningful.

<sup>38</sup> A hypothesis is either false or true, to be accepted or rejected
accordingly. If it is shown to be true, it becomes a fact, after which
no one attempts to evaluate it unless its status *as* fact is
questioned. *Every* idea to which the ego has accorded the status of
fact is questionable, because facts are in the realm of knowledge.

<sup>39</sup> Confusing realms of discourse is a thinking error which philosophers
have recognized for centuries. Psychologists are generally quite
deficient in this respect, as are many theologians. Data from one realm
of discourse do not mean anything in another, because they can be
understood only *within* the thought system of which they are a part.
That is why psychologists are concentrating increasingly on the ego in
an attempt to unify their clearly unrelated data. It need hardly be
said that an attempt to relate the unrelated *cannot* succeed.

<sup>40</sup> The more recent ecological emphases are but another ingenious way of
trying to impose order on chaos. We have already credited the ego with
considerable ingenuity, though not with creativeness. It should,
however, be remembered that inventiveness is really wasted effort, even
in its most ingenious forms. We do not have to explain *anything*. This
is why we need not trouble ourselves with inventiveness. The highly
specific nature of invention is not worthy of the abstract creativity
of God's creations.

