---
chapter: Twenty Five
ctitle: The Remedy
title: The State of Sinlessness
ref: Tx.25.VI
---

<sup>37</sup> The state of sinlessness is merely this: the whole desire to attack
is gone, and so there is no reason to perceive the Son of God as other
than he is. The need for guilt is gone because it has no purpose and is
meaningless without the goal of sin. Attack and sin are bound as one
illusion, each the cause and aim and justifier of the other. Each is
meaningless alone, but seems to draw a meaning from the other. Each
depends upon the other for whatever sense it seems to have. And no one
could believe in one unless the other were the truth, for each attests
the other *must* be true.

<sup>38</sup> Attack makes Christ your enemy and God along with Him. Must you not
be afraid with “enemies” like these? And must you not be fearful of
*yourself*? For you have hurt yourself and made your Self your “enemy.”
And now you must believe you are not you but something alien to yourself
and “something else,” a “something” to be feared instead of loved. Who
would attack whatever he perceives as wholly innocent? And who,
*because* he wishes to attack, can fail to think it must be guilty to
deserve the wish and leave him innocent? And who would see the Son of
God as innocent and wish him dead? Christ stands before you both each
time you look on one another. He has not gone because your eyes are
closed. But what is there to see by searching for your savior, seeing
Him through sightless eyes?

<sup>39</sup> It is not Christ you see by looking thus. It is the “enemy” confused
with Christ you look upon. And hate because there is no sin in him for
you to see. Nor do you hear his plaintive call, unchanged in content in
whatever form the call is made, that you unite with him and join with
him in innocence and peace. And yet beneath the ego's senseless shrieks,
such *is* the call that God has given him that you might hear in him His
Call to you and answer by returning unto God what is His own.

<sup>40</sup> The Son of God asks only this of you—that you return to him what is
his due that you may *share* in it with him. Alone does neither have it.
So must it remain useless to both. Together, it will give to each an
equal strength to save the other and save himself along with him.
Forgiven by you, your savior offers you salvation. Condemned by you, he
offers death to you. In everyone you see but the reflection of what you
chose to have him be to you. If you decide against his proper function,
the only one he has in truth, you are depriving him of all the joy he
would have found if he fulfilled the role God gave to him. But think not
Heaven is lost to him alone. Nor can it be regained unless the way is
shown to him through you that you may find it, walking by his side.

<sup>41</sup> It is no sacrifice that he be saved, for by his freedom will you gain
your own. To let his function be fulfilled is but the means to let yours
be. And so you walk toward Heaven or toward hell, but not alone. How
beautiful his sinlessness will be when you perceive it! And how great
will be your joy, when he is free to offer you the gift of sight God
gave to him for you! He has no need but this—that you allow him freedom
to complete the task God gave to him. Remembering but this—that what he
does you do along with him. And as you see him, so do you define the
function he will have for you until you see him differently and *let*
him be what God appointed that he be to you.

<sup>42</sup> Against the hatred that the Son of God may cherish toward himself is
God believed to be without the power to save what He created from the
pain of hell. But in the love he shows himself is God made free to *let*
His Will be done. In each of you, you see the picture of your own belief
in what the Will of God must be for you. In your forgiveness will you
understand His love for you; through your attack believe He hates you,
thinking Heaven must be hell. Look once again upon your brother, not
without the understanding that he is the way to Heaven or to hell as you
perceive him. But forget not this—the role you give to him is given
*you*, and you *will* walk the way you pointed out to him because it is
your judgment on yourself.

