---
chapter: Twenty Five
ctitle: The Remedy
title: The Principle of Salvation
ref: Tx.25.IX
---

<sup>63</sup> The Holy Spirit can use all that you give to Him for your salvation.
But He cannot use what you withhold, for He cannot take it from you
without your willingness. For if He did, you would believe He wrested it
from you against your will. And so you would not learn it *is* your will
to be without it. You need not give it to Him wholly willingly, for if
you could, you'd have no need of Him. But this He needs—that you prefer
He take it than that you keep it for yourself alone and recognize that
what brings loss to no one you would not know. This much is necessary to
add to the idea no one can lose for you to gain. And nothing more.

<sup>64</sup> Here is the only principle salvation needs. Nor is it necessary that
your faith in it be strong, unswerving, and without attack from all
beliefs opposed to it. You *have* no fixed allegiance. But remember
salvation is not needed by the saved. You are not called upon to do what
one divided still against himself would find impossible. Have little
faith that wisdom could be found in such a state of mind. But be you
thankful that only little faith is *asked* of you. What *but* a little
faith remains to those who still believe in sin? What could they know of
Heaven and the justice of the saved?

<sup>65</sup> There is a kind of justice in salvation of which the world knows
nothing. To the world, justice and *vengeance* are the same, for sinners
see justice only as their punishment, perhaps sustained by someone else
but not escaped. The laws of sin *demand* a victim. Who it may be makes
little difference. But death must be the cost and must be paid. This is
not justice but insanity. Yet how could justice be defined without
insanity where love means hate and death is seen as victory and triumph
over eternity and timelessness and life?

<sup>66</sup> You who know not of justice still can ask and learn the answer.
Justice looks on all in the same way. It is not just that one should
lack for what another has. For that is vengeance in whatever form it
takes. Justice demands *no* sacrifice, for any sacrifice is made that
sin may be preserved and kept. It is a payment offered for the cost of
sin, but not the total cost. The rest is taken from another, to be laid
beside your little payment to “atone” for all that you would keep and
not give up. So is the victim seen as partly you, with someone else by
far the greater part. And in the total cost, the greater his, the less
is yours. And justice, being blind, is satisfied by being paid, it
matters not by whom. Can this *be* justice? God knows not of this. But
justice *does* He know and knows it well. For He is wholly fair to
everyone.

<sup>67</sup> Vengeance is alien to God's Mind *because* He knows of justice. To be
just is to be fair and *not* be vengeful. Fairness and vengeance are
impossible, for each one contradicts the other and denies that it is
real. It is impossible for you to share the Holy Spirit's justice with a
mind that can conceive of specialness at all. Yet how could He be just
if He condemns a sinner for the crimes he did not do but *thinks* he
did? And where would justice be if He demanded of the ones obsessed with
the idea of punishment that they lay it aside unaided and perceive it is
not true? It is extremely hard for those who still believe sin
meaningful to understand the Holy Spirit's justice.

<sup>68</sup> They *must* believe He shares their own confusion and cannot avoid
the vengeance that their own belief in justice must entail. And so they
fear the Holy Spirit and perceive the “wrath” of God in Him. \[They are
unjust indeed to Him.\] Nor can they trust Him not to strike them dead
with lightning bolts torn from the “fires” of Heaven by God's own angry
hand. They *do* believe that Heaven is hell and *are* afraid of love.
And deep suspicion and the chill of fear comes over them when they are
told that they have never sinned. Their world depends on sin's
stability. And they perceive the “threat” of what God knows as justice
to be more destructive to themselves and to their world than vengeance,
which they understand and love.

<sup>69</sup> So do they think the loss of sin a curse. And flee \[the blessing
of\] the Holy Spirit as if He were a messenger from hell sent from above
in treachery and guile to work God's vengeance on them in the guise of a
deliverer and friend. What could He be to them except a devil dressed to
deceive within an angel's cloak? And what escape has He for them except
a door to hell that seems to look like Heaven's gate?

<sup>70</sup> Yet justice cannot punish those who ask for punishment but have a
Judge Who knows that they are wholly innocent in truth. In justice, He
is bound to set them free and give them all the honor they deserve and
have denied themselves because they are not fair and cannot understand
that they are innocent. Love is not understandable to sinners because
they think that justice is split off from love and stands for something
else.

<sup>71</sup> And thus is love perceived as weak and vengeance strong. For love has
*lost* when judgment left its side and is too weak to save from
punishment. But vengeance without love has *gained* in strength by being
separate and apart from love. And what but vengeance now can help and
save, while love stands feebly by with helpless hands, bereft of justice
and vitality and powerless to save? What can Love ask of you who think
that all of this is true? Could He, in justice and in love believe in
your confusion you have much to give? You are not asked to trust Him
far. No further than what you see He offers you and what you recognize
you could not give yourself.

<sup>72</sup> In God's own justice does He recognize all you deserve but
understands as well that you cannot accept it for yourself. It is His
special function to hold out to you the gifts the innocent *deserve.*
And every one that you accept brings joy to Him as well as you. He knows
that Heaven is richer made by each one you accept. And God rejoices as
His Son receives what loving justice knows to be his due. For love and
justice are *not* different. *Because* they are the same does mercy
stand at God's right hand and give the Son of God the power to forgive
*himself* of sin.

<sup>73</sup> To him who merits everything, how can it be that anything be kept
from him? For that would be injustice and unfair indeed to all the
holiness that is in him, however much he recognize it not. God knows of
no injustice. He would not allow His Son be judged by those who seek his
death and could not see his worth at all. What honest witnesses could
they call forth to speak on his behalf? And who would come to plead for
him and not against his life? No justice would be given him by you. Yet
God ensured that justice *would* be done unto the Son He loves and would
protect from all unfairness you might seek to offer, believing vengeance
*is* his proper due.

<sup>74</sup> As specialness cares not who pays the cost of sin, so it be paid, the
Holy Spirit heeds not who looks on innocence at last, provided it is
seen and recognized. For just *one* witness is enough if he sees truly.
Simple justice asks no more. Of each one does the Holy Spirit ask if he
will be that one, so justice may return to love and there be satisfied.
Each special function He allots is but for this—that each one learn that
love and justice are not separate. And both are strengthened by their
union with each other. Without love is justice prejudiced and weak. And
love without justice is impossible. For love is fair and cannot chasten
without cause. What cause can *be* to warrant an attack upon the
innocent? In justice then does love correct mistakes, but not in
vengeance. For that would be unjust to innocence.

<sup>75</sup> You can be perfect witness to the power of love *and* justice if you
understand it is impossible the Son of God could merit vengeance. You
need not perceive in every circumstance that this is true. Nor need you
look to your experience within the world, which is but shadows of all
that is *really* happening within yourself. The understanding which you
need comes not of you but from a larger Self, so great and holy that He
could not doubt His innocence. Your special function is a call to Him
that He may smile on you whose sinlessness He shares. *His*
understanding will be *yours.* And so the Holy Spirit's special function
has been fulfilled. God's Son has found a witness unto his sinlessness
and not his sin. How little need you give the Holy Spirit that simple
justice may be given you!

<sup>76</sup> Without impartiality there is no justice. How can specialness be
just? Judge not because you cannot, not because you are a miserable
sinner too. How can the special *really* understand that justice is the
same for everyone? To take from one to give another must be an injustice
to them both, since they are equal in the Holy Spirit's sight. Their
Father gave the same inheritance to both. Who would have more or less is
not aware that he has everything. He is no judge of what must be
another's due, because he thinks *he* is deprived. And so must he be
envious and try to take away from whom he judges. He is not impartial
and cannot fairly see another's rights because his own have been
obscured to him.

<sup>77</sup> You have the *right* to all the universe—to perfect peace, complete
deliverance from all effects of sin, and to the life eternal, joyous and
complete in every way, as God appointed for His holy Son. This is the
only justice Heaven knows, and all the Holy Spirit brings to earth. Your
special function shows you nothing else but perfect justice *can*
prevail for you. And you are safe from vengeance in all forms. The world
deceives, but it cannot replace God's justice with a version of its own.
For only love *is* just and *can* perceive what justice must accord the
Son of God. Let love decide and never fear that you in your unfairness
will deprive yourself of what God's justice has allotted you.

