---
chapter: Twenty Five
ctitle: The Remedy
title: The Justice of Heaven
ref: Tx.25.X
---

<sup>78</sup> What can it be but arrogance to think your little errors cannot be
undone by Heaven's justice? And what could this mean except that they
are sins and not mistakes, forever uncorrectable, and to be met with
vengeance not with justice? Are you willing to be released from all
effects of sin? You cannot answer this until you see all that the answer
must entail. For if you answer “yes,” it means you will forgo all values
of this world in favor of the peace of Heaven. Not *one* sin would you
retain. And not *one* doubt that this is possible will you hold dear
that sin be kept in place. You mean that truth has greater value now
than *all* illusions. And you recognize that truth must be revealed to
you because you know not what it is.

<sup>79</sup> To give reluctantly is not to gain the gift because you are reluctant
to *accept* it. It is saved for you until reluctance to receive it
disappears and you are willing it be given you. God's justice warrants
gratitude, not fear. Nothing you give is lost to you or anyone, but
cherished and preserved \[for you\] in Heaven, where all of the
treasures given to God's Son are kept for him and offered anyone who but
holds out his hand in willingness they be received. Nor is the treasure
less as it is given out. Each gift \[received\] but *adds* to the
supply. For God is fair. He does not fight against His Son's reluctance
to perceive salvation as a gift from Him. Yet would His justice not be
satisfied until it is received by everyone.

<sup>80</sup> Be certain any answer to a problem the Holy Spirit solves will always
be one in which no one loses. And this must be true because He asks no
sacrifice of anyone. An answer which demands the slightest loss to
anyone has not resolved the problem but has added to it and made it
greater, harder to resolve, and *more* unfair. It is impossible the Holy
Spirit could see unfairness as a resolution. To Him, what is unfair must
be corrected *because* it is unfair. And every error is a perception in
which one at least is seen unfairly. Thus is justice not accorded to the
Son of God. When anyone is seen as losing, he has been condemned. And
punishment becomes his due instead of justice.

<sup>81</sup> The sight of innocence makes punishment impossible and justice sure.
The Holy Spirit's perception leaves no ground for an attack. Only a
*loss* could justify attack, and loss of any kind He cannot see. The
world solves problems in another way. It sees a resolution as a state in
which it is decided who shall win and who shall lose—how much the one
shall take and how much can the loser still defend.

<sup>82</sup> Yet does the problem still remain unsolved, for *only* justice can
set up a state in which there is no loser, no one left unfairly treated
and deprived, and thus with grounds for vengeance. Problem solving
cannot be vengeance, which at best can bring another problem added to
the first, in which the murder is not obvious. The Holy Spirit's problem
solving is the way in which the problem *ends.* It has been solved
*because* it has been met with justice. Until it has, it will recur
because it has not yet been solved. The principle that justice means no
one can lose is crucial to this course. For miracles *depend* on
justice. Not as it is seen through this world's eyes, but as God knows
it, and as knowledge is reflected in the sight the Holy Spirit gives.

<sup>83</sup> *No one* deserves to lose. And what would be unjust to him cannot
occur. Healing must be for everyone *because* he does not merit an
attack of any kind. What order can there be in miracles, unless someone
deserves to suffer more and others less? And *is* this justice to the
wholly innocent? A miracle *is* justice. It is not a special gift to
some to be withheld from others as less worthy, more condemned, and thus
apart from healing. Who is there who can be separate from salvation if
its *purpose* is the end of specialness? Where is salvation's justice if
some errors are unforgivable and warrant vengeance in place of healing
and return of peace?

<sup>84</sup> Salvation cannot seek to help God's Son be more unfair than *he* has
sought to be. If miracles, the Holy Spirit's gift, were given specially
to an elect and special group and kept apart from others as less
deserving, then is He *ally* to specialness. What He cannot perceive He
bears no witness to. And everyone is equally entitled to His gift of
healing and deliverance and peace. To give a problem to the Holy Spirit
to solve for you means that you *want* it solved. To keep it for
yourself to solve without His help is to decide it should remain
unsettled, unresolved, and lasting in its power of injustice and attack.
No one *can* be unjust to you, unless you have decided first to *be*
unjust. And then must problems rise to block your way and peace be
scattered by the winds of hate.

<sup>85</sup> Unless you think that all your brothers have an equal right to
miracles with you, you will not claim your right to them because you
were unjust to one with equal rights. Seek to deny, and you *will* feel
denied. Seek to deprive, and you *have* been deprived. A miracle can
*never* be received because another could receive it *not*. Only
forgiveness offers miracles. And pardon must be just to everyone.

<sup>86</sup> The little problems that you keep and hide become your secret sins
because you did not choose to let them be removed for you. And so they
gather dust and grow until they cover everything that you perceive and
leave you fair to no one. Not one right do you believe you have. And
bitterness, with vengeance justified and mercy lost, condemns you as
unworthy of forgiveness. The unforgiven *have* no mercy to bestow upon
another. That is why your sole responsibility must be to take
forgiveness for yourself. The miracle that you receive, you *give*. Each
one becomes an illustration of the law on which salvation rests—that
justice must be done to all if anyone is to be healed. No one can lose,
and everyone *must* benefit.

<sup>87</sup> Each miracle is an example of what justice can accomplish when it is
offered to everyone alike. It is received and given equally. It is
awareness that giving and receiving are the same. Because it does not
make the same unlike, it sees no differences where none exist. And thus
it is the same for everyone, because it sees no differences in *them.*
Its offering is universal, and it teaches but one message:

<sup>88</sup> *What is God's **belongs** to everyone and **is** his due.*

