---
chapter: Twenty Five
ctitle: The Remedy
title: The Joining of Minds
ref: Tx.25.V
---

<sup>32</sup> Minds that are joined and *recognize* they are can feel no guilt. For
they cannot attack, and they rejoice that this is so, seeing their
safety in this happy fact. Their joy is in the innocence they see. And
thus they seek for it because it is their purpose to behold it and
rejoice. Everyone seeks for what will bring him joy as he defines it. It
is not the aim as such that varies. Yet it is the way in which the aim
is *seen* that makes the choice of means inevitable and beyond the hope
of change unless the aim is changed. And then the means are chosen once
again, as what will bring rejoicing is defined another way and sought
for differently.

<sup>33</sup> Perception's basic law could thus be said, “You will rejoice at what
you see because you *see* it to rejoice.” And while you think that
suffering and sin will bring you joy, so long will they be there for you
to see. Nothing is harmful or beneficent apart from what you wish. It is
your wish that makes it what it is in its effects on you. Because you
*chose* it as a means to gain these same effects, believing them to be
the bringers of rejoicing and of joy. Even in Heaven does this law
obtain. The Son of God creates to bring him joy, sharing his Father's
purpose in his own creation that his joy might be increased and God's
along with his.

<sup>34</sup> You makers of a world that is not so, take rest and comfort in
another world where peace abides. This world you bring with you to all
the weary eyes and tired hearts that look on sin and beat its sad
refrain. From you can come their rest. From you can rise a world they
will rejoice to look upon and where their hearts are glad. In you there
is a vision which extends to all of them and covers them in gentleness
and light. And in this widening world of light, the darkness they
thought was there is pushed away until it is but distant shadows, far
away, not long to be remembered as the sun shines them to nothingness.
And all their “evil” thoughts and “sinful” hopes, their dreams of guilt
and merciless revenge, and every wish to hurt and kill and die will
disappear before the sun you bring.

<sup>35</sup> Would you not do this for the love of God? And for *yourself*? For
think what it would do for you. Your “evil” thoughts that haunt you now
will seem increasingly remote and far away from you. And they go farther
and farther off because the sun in you has risen that they may be pushed
away before the light. They linger for a while, a *little* while, in
twisted forms too far away for recognition and are gone forever. And in
the sunlight you will stand in quiet, in innocence, and wholly unafraid.
And from you will the rest you found extend, so that your peace can
never fall away and leave you homeless. Those who offer peace to
everyone have found a home in Heaven the world cannot destroy. For it is
large enough to hold the world within its peace.

<sup>36</sup> In you is all of Heaven. Every leaf that falls is given life in you.
Each bird that ever sang will sing again in you. And every flower that
ever bloomed has saved its perfume and its loveliness for you. What aim
can supersede the Will of God and of His Son that Heaven be restored to
him for whom it was created as his only home? Nothing before and nothing
after it. No other place, no other state nor time. Nothing beyond nor
nearer. Nothing else. In any form. This can you bring to all the world
and all the thoughts that entered it and were mistaken for a little
while. How better could your own mistakes be brought to truth than by
your willingness to bring the light of Heaven with you as you walk
beyond the world of darkness into light?

