---
chapter: Twenty Five
ctitle: The Remedy
title: Commuting the Sentence
ref: Tx.25.VIII
---

<sup>50</sup> And if the Holy Spirit can commute each sentence that you laid upon
yourself into a blessing, then it cannot be a sin. Sin is the one thing
in all the world that *cannot* change. It is immutable. And on its
changelessness the world depends. The magic of the world can seem to
hide the pain of sin from sinners and deceive with glitter and with
guile. Yet each one knows the cost of sin is death. And so it *is.* For
sin is a *request* for death, a wish to make this world's foundation
sure as love, dependable as Heaven, and as strong as God Himself. The
world *is* safe from love to everyone who thinks sin possible. Nor
*will* it change. Yet *is* it possible what God created not should share
the attributes of His creation when it opposes it in every way?

<sup>51</sup> It *cannot* be the “sinner's” wish for death is just as strong as is
God's Will for life. Nor can the basis of a world He did not make be
firm and sure as Heaven. How could it be that hell and Heaven are the
same? And is it possible that what He did not will cannot be changed?
What is immutable besides His Will? And what can share Its attributes
except Itself? What wish can rise against His Will and be immutable? If
you could realize *nothing* is changeless but the Will of God, this
course would not be difficult for you. For it is this that you do not
believe. Yet there is nothing else you *could* believe if you but looked
at what it really is.

<sup>52</sup> Let us go back to what we said before and think of it more carefully.
It must be so that either God is mad or is this world a place of
madness. Not one Thought of His makes any sense at all within this
world. And nothing that the world believes as true has any meaning in
His Mind at all. What makes no sense and has no meaning *is* insanity.
And what is madness *cannot* be the truth. If one belief so deeply
valued here were true, then every Thought God ever had is an illusion.
And if but one Thought of His is true, then all beliefs the world gives
any meaning to are false and make no sense at all. This *is* the choice
you make. Do not attempt to see it differently nor twist it into
something it is not. For only this decision *can* you make. The rest is
up to God and not to you.

<sup>53</sup> To justify one value that the world upholds is to deny your Father's
sanity and *yours*. For God and His beloved Son do not think
differently. And it is the agreement of their thought that makes the Son
a co-creator with the mind Whose Thought created him. And if he chooses
to believe one thought opposed to truth, he has decided he is not his
Father's Son because the Son is mad, and sanity must lie apart from both
the Father *and* the Son. This you *believe.* Think not that this belief
depends upon the form it takes. Who thinks the world is sane in *any*
way, is justified in *anything* it thinks, or is maintained by *any*
form of reason believes this to be true. Sin is not real *because* the
Father and the Son are not insane. This world is meaningless *because*
it rests on sin. Who could create the changeless if it does not rest on
truth?

<sup>54</sup> The Holy Spirit has the power to change the whole foundation of the
world you see to something else—a basis not insane on which a sane
perception can be based, another world perceived. And one in which
nothing is contradicted that would lead the Son of God to sanity and
joy. Nothing attests to death and cruelty, to separation, and to
differences. For here is everything perceived as one, and no one loses
that each one may gain.

<sup>55</sup> Test everything that you believe against this *one* requirement. And
understand that everything that meets this one demand is worthy of your
faith. But nothing else. What is not love is sin, and either one
perceives the other as insane and meaningless. Love is the basis for a
world perceived as wholly mad to sinners who believe theirs is the way
to sanity. But sin is equally insane within the sight of love, whose
gentle eyes would look beyond the madness and rest peacefully on truth.
Each sees a world immutable, as each defines the changeless and eternal
truth of what you are. And each reflects a view of what the Father and
the Son must be to make that viewpoint meaningful and sane.

<sup>56</sup> Your special function is the special form in which the fact that God
is not insane appears most sensible and meaningful to you. The content
is the same. The form is suited to your special needs and to the special
time and place in which you think you find yourself and where you can be
free of place and time and all that you believe must limit you. The Son
of God cannot be bound by time nor place nor anything God did not will.
Yet if His Will is seen as madness, then the form of sanity which makes
it most acceptable to those who are insane requires special choice. Nor
can this choice be made *by* the insane, whose problem is their choices
are not free and made with reason in the light of sense.

<sup>57</sup> It *would* be madness to entrust salvation to the insane. Because He
is *not* mad has God appointed One as sane as He to raise a saner world
to meet the sight of everyone who chose insanity as his salvation. To
this One is given the choice of form most suitable to him; one which
will not attack the world he sees, but enter into it in quietness and
*show* him he is mad. This One but points to an alternative, *another*
way of looking at what he has seen before and recognizes as the world in
which he lives and thought he understood before.

<sup>58</sup> Now *must* he question this because the form of the alternative is
one which he cannot deny nor overlook nor fail completely to perceive at
all. To each his special function is designed to be perceived as
possible and more and more desired as it *proves* to him that it is an
alternative he really *wants.* From this position does his sinfulness
and all the sin he sees within the world offer him less and less— until
he comes to understand it *cost* him his sanity and stands between him
and whatever hope he has of *being* sane. Nor is he left without escape
from madness, for he has a special part in everyone's escape. He can no
more be left outside without a special function in the hope of peace
than could the Father overlook His Son and pass him by in careless
thoughtlessness.

<sup>59</sup> What is dependable *except* God's Love? And where does sanity abide
*except* in Him? The One Who speaks for Him can show you this in the
alternative He chose especially for you. It is God's Will that you
remember this and so emerge from deepest mourning into perfect joy.
Accept the function that has been assigned to you in God's Own plan to
show His Sons that hell and Heaven are different, *not* the same. And
that in Heaven *they* are all the same, without the differences which
would have made a hell of Heaven and a heaven of hell, had such insanity
been possible.

<sup>60</sup> The whole belief that someone loses but reflects the underlying tenet
God must be insane. For in this world, it seems that one must gain
*because* another lost. If *this* were true, then God is mad indeed! But
what is this belief except a form of the more basic tenet, “Sin is real
and rules the world”? For every little gain must someone lose and pay
exact amount in blood and suffering. For otherwise would evil triumph
and destruction be the total cost of any gain at all. You who believe
that God is mad, look carefully at this and understand that it must be
that either God or *this* must be insane, but hardly both.

<sup>61</sup> Salvation is rebirth of the idea no one *can* lose for anyone to
gain. And everyone *must* gain if anyone would be a gainer. Here is
sanity restored. And on this single rock of truth can faith in God's
eternal saneness rest in perfect confidence and perfect peace. Reason is
satisfied, for all insane beliefs can be corrected here. And sin *must*
be impossible if *this* is true. This is the rock on which salvation
rests, the vantage point from which the Holy Spirit gives meaning and
direction to the plan in which your special function has a part. For
here your special function is made whole because it shares the
*function* of the whole.

<sup>62</sup> Remember all temptation is but this—a mad belief that God's insanity
would make you sane and give you what you want. That either God or you
must lose to madness because your aims can *not* be reconciled. Death
demands life, but life is not maintained at any cost. No one can suffer
for the Will of God to be fulfilled. Salvation is His Will *because* you
share it. Not for you alone but for the Self which is the Son of God. He
*cannot* lose, for if he could, the loss would be his Father's, and in
Him no loss is possible. And this is sane *because* it is the truth.

