---
chapter: Twenty Five
ctitle: The Remedy
title: The Special Function
ref: Tx.25.VII
---

<sup>43</sup> The grace of God rests gently on forgiving eyes, and everything they
look on speaks of Him to the beholder. He can see no evil, nothing in
the world to fear, and no one who is different from himself. And as he
loves them, so he looks upon himself with love and gentleness. He would
no more condemn himself for his mistakes than damn another. He is not an
arbiter of vengeance nor a punisher of sin. The kindness of his sight
rests on himself with all the tenderness it offers others. For he would
only heal and only bless. And being in accord with what God wills, he
has the power to heal and bless all those he looks on with the grace of
God upon his sight.

<sup>44</sup> Eyes become used to darkness, and the light of brilliant day seems
painful to the eyes grown long accustomed to the dim effects perceived
at twilight. And they turn away from sunlight and the clarity it brings
to what they look upon. Dimness seems better—easier to see and better
recognized. Somehow, the vague and more obscure seems easier to look
upon; less painful to the eyes than what is wholly clear and
unambiguous. Yet this is not what eyes are *for.* And who can say that
he prefers the darkness and maintain he *wants* to see? The *wish* to
see calls down the grace of God upon your eyes and brings the gift of
light that makes sight possible.

<sup>45</sup> Will you behold your brother? God is glad to have you look on him. He
does not will your savior be unrecognized by you. Nor does He will that
he remain without the function that He gave to him. Let him no more be
lonely, for the lonely ones are those who see no function in the world
for them to fill, no place where they are needed, and no aim which only
they can perfectly fulfill.

<sup>46</sup> Such is the Holy Spirit's kind perception of specialness—His use of
what you made, to heal instead of harm. To each He gives a special
function in salvation he alone can fill—a part for only him. Nor is the
plan complete until he finds his special function and fulfills the part
assigned to him to make himself complete within a world where
incompletion rules.

<sup>47</sup> Here, where the laws of God do not prevail in perfect form, can he
yet do *one* perfect thing and make *one* perfect choice. And by this
act of special faithfulness to one perceived as other than himself, he
learns the gift was given to himself, and so they *must* be one.
Forgiveness is the only function meaningful in time. It is the means the
Holy Spirit uses to translate specialness from sin into salvation.
Forgiveness is for all. But when it rests on all, it is complete and
every function of this world completed with it. Then is time no more.

<sup>48</sup> Yet while in time, there is still much to do. And each must do what
is allotted him, for on his part does *all* the plan depend. He *has* a
special part in time, for so he chose, and choosing it, he made it for
himself. His wish was not denied but changed in form to let it serve his
brother *and* himself and thus become a means to save instead of lose.
Salvation is no more than a reminder this world is not your home; its
laws are not imposed on you; its values are not yours. \[And nothing
that you *think* you see in it is *really* there at all.\] And this is
seen and understood as each one takes his part in its undoing, as he did
in making it. He has the means for either, as he always did. The
specialness he chose to hurt himself did God appoint to be the means for
his salvation from the very instant that the choice was made. His
special sin was made his special grace. His special hate became his
special love.

<sup>49</sup> The Holy Spirit *needs* your special function that His may be
fulfilled. Think not you lack a special value here. You wanted it, and
it *is* given you. All that you made can serve salvation easily and
well. The Son of God can make no choice the Holy Spirit cannot employ on
his behalf and *not* against himself. Only in darkness does your
specialness appear to be attack. In light, you see it as your *special
function* in the plan to save the Son of God from *all* attack and let
him understand that he is safe, as he has always been and will remain in
time and in eternity alike. This is the function given each of you for
one another. Take it gently then from one another's hand, and let
salvation be perfectly fulfilled in both of you. Do this *one* thing,
that everything be given you.

