---
chapter: Twenty Five
ctitle: The Remedy
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.25.I
---

The Christ in you inhabits not a body. Yet He is in you. And thus it
must be that *you* are not within a body. What is within you cannot be
outside. And it is certain that you cannot be apart from what is at the
very center of your life. What gives you life cannot be housed in death.
No more can you. Christ is within a frame of holiness whose only purpose
is that He may be made manifest to those who know Him not, that He may
call to them to come to Him and see Him where they thought their bodies
were. Then will their bodies melt away that they may frame His holiness
in them.

<sup>2</sup> No one who carries Christ in him can fail to recognize Him everywhere.
*Except* in bodies. And as long as they believe *they* are in bodies,
where they think they are He cannot be. And so they carry Him
unknowingly and do not make Him manifest. And thus they do not recognize
Him where He is. The son of man is not the risen Christ. Yet does the
Son of God abide exactly where he is and walks with him within his
holiness, as plain to see as is his specialness set forth within his
body.

<sup>3</sup> The body *needs* no healing. But the mind that thinks it *is* a body
is sick indeed! And it is here that Christ sets forth the remedy. His
purpose folds the body in His light and fills it with the holiness that
shines from Him. And nothing that the body says or does but makes Him
manifest. To those who know Him not, it carries Him in gentleness and
love to heal their minds. Such is the mission that your brother has for
you. And such it must be that your mission is for him.

