---
chapter: Twenty Five
ctitle: The Remedy
title: The Fundamental Law of Perception
ref: Tx.25.IV
---

<sup>23</sup> To the extent to which you value guilt, to that extent will you
perceive a world in which attack is justified. To the extent to which
you recognize that guilt is meaningless, to that extent will you
perceive attack cannot *be* justified. This is in strict accord with
vision's fundamental law: you see what you believe is there, and you
believe it there because you *want* it there. Perception has no other
law than this. The rest but stems from this, to hold it up and offer it
support. This is perception's form adapted to this world of God's more
basic law that love creates itself and nothing *but* itself.

<sup>24</sup> God's laws do not obtain directly to a world perception rules, for
such a world could not have been created by the Mind to which perception
has no meaning. Yet are His laws reflected everywhere. Not that the
world where this reflection is, is real at all. Only because His Son
believes it is, and from His Son's belief He could not let Himself be
separate entirely. He could not enter His Son's insanity with him, but
He could be sure His sanity went there with him so he could not be lost
forever in the madness of his wish.

<sup>25</sup> Perception rests on choosing; knowledge does not. Knowledge has but
one law because it has but one Creator. But this world has two who made
it, and they do not see it as the same. To each it has a different
purpose, and to each it is a perfect means to serve the goal for which
it is perceived. For specialness it is the perfect frame to set it
off—the perfect battleground to wage its wars, the perfect shelter for
the illusions which it would make real. Not one but it upholds in its
perception; not one but can be fully justified.

<sup>26</sup> There is another Maker of the world, the simultaneous Corrector of
the mad belief that anything could be established and maintained without
some link that kept it still within the laws of God; not as the law
itself upholds the universe as God created it, but in some form adapted
to the need the Son of God believes he has. Corrected error is the
error's end. And thus has God protected still His Son, even in error.
There is another purpose in the world that error made because it has
another Maker Who can reconcile its goal with His Creator's purpose. In
His perception of the world, nothing is seen but justifies forgiveness
and the sight of perfect sinlessness. Nothing arises but is met with
instant and complete forgiveness.

<sup>27</sup> Nothing remains an instant to obscure the sinlessness that shines
unchanged beyond the pitiful attempts of specialness to put it out of
mind where it must be and light the body up *instead* of it. The lamps
of Heaven are not for it to choose to see them where it will. If it
elects to see them elsewhere from their home, as if they lit a place
where they could never be, and *you* agree, then must the Maker of the
world correct your error, lest you remain in darkness where the lamps
are not. Everyone here has entered darkness, yet no one has entered it
alone. \[Nor need he stay more than an instant.\] For he has come with
Heaven's Help within him ready to lead him *out* of darkness into light
at any time.

<sup>28</sup> The time he chooses *can* be any time, for help is there, awaiting
but his choice. And when he chooses to avail himself of what is given
him, then will he see each situation that he thought before was means to
justify his anger turned to an event which justifies his love. He will
hear plainly that the calls to war he heard before are really calls to
peace. He will perceive that where he gave attack is but another altar
where he can with equal ease and far more happiness bestow forgiveness.
And he will reinterpret all temptation as just another chance to bring
him joy. How can a misperception be a sin? Let all your brother's errors
be to you nothing except a chance for you to see the workings of the
Helper given you to see the world He made, instead of yours.

<sup>29</sup> What then *is* justified? What do you *want*? For these two questions
are the same. And when you see them *as* the same, your choice is made.
For it is seeing them as one that brings release from the belief there
*are* two ways to see. This world has much to offer to your peace and
many chances to extend your own forgiveness. Such its purpose is to
those who *want* to see peace and forgiveness descend on them and offer
them the light.

<sup>30</sup> The Maker of the world of gentleness has perfect power to offset the
world of violence and hate that seems to stand between you and His
gentleness. It is not there in His forgiving eyes. And therefore it need
not be there in yours. Sin is the fixed belief perception *cannot*
change. What has been damned is damned and damned forever, being forever
unforgivable. If then it *is* forgiven, sin's perception must have been
wrong. And thus is change made possible. The Holy Spirit too sees what
He sees as far beyond the chance of change. But on His vision sin cannot
encroach, for sin has been *corrected* by His sight. And thus it must
have been an error, not a sin. For what it claimed could never be has
been. Sin is attacked by punishment and so preserved. But to forgive it
is to change its state from error into truth.

<sup>31</sup> The Son of God could never sin, but he *can* wish for what would hurt
him. And he *has* the power to think he can be hurt. What could this be
except a misperception of himself? Is this a sin or a mistake,
forgivable or not? Does he need help or condemnation? Is it your purpose
that he be saved or damned? Forgetting not that what he is to you will
make this choice *your* future? For you make it *now*, the instant when
all time becomes a means to reach a goal. Make then your choice. But
recognize that *in* this choice the purpose of the world you see is
chosen and *will* be justified.

