---
chapter: Twenty Eight
ctitle: The Undoing of Fear
title: The Alternate to Dreams of Fear
ref: Tx.28.VI
---

<sup>47</sup> What is a sense of sickness but a sense of limitation? Of a splitting
*off* and separating *from*? A gap perceived between \[ourselves\] and
what is seen as health? The good is seen outside; the evil, in. And thus
is sickness separating off the self from good and keeping evil in. God
is the *alternate* to dreams of fear. Who shares in them can *never*
share in Him. But who withdraws his mind from sharing them *is* sharing
Him. There is no other choice. Except you share it, nothing can exist.
And *you* exist because God shared His Will with you, that His creation
might create.

<sup>48</sup> It is the *sharing* of the evil dreams of hate and malice, bitterness
and death, of sin and suffering, \[of\] pain and loss, that makes them
real. Unshared, they are perceived as meaningless. The fear is gone from
them because you did not give them your support. Where fear has gone,
there love *must* come because there *are* but these alternatives. Where
one appears, the other disappears. And which you share becomes the only
one you have. You have the one which you accept, because it is the only
one you \[*want*\] to have. You share no evil dreams if you forgive the
dreamer and perceive that he is not the dream he made. And so he cannot
be a part of yours, from which you *both* are free. Forgiveness
separates the dreamer from the evil dream and thus releases him.

<sup>49</sup> Remember if you share an evil dream, you will believe you *are* the
dream you share. And fearing it, you will not *want* to know your own
Identity because you think that *it* is fearful. And you *will* deny
your Self and walk upon an alien ground which your Creator did not make
and where you seem to be a “something” you are not. You *will* make war
upon your Self, which seems to be your enemy, and *will* attack your
brother as a part of what you hate. There *is* no compromise. You are
your Self or an illusion. What can be between illusion and the truth? A
middle ground where you can be a thing that is not you must be a dream
and cannot be the truth.

<sup>50</sup> You have conceived a little gap between illusions and the truth to be
the place where all your safety lies and where your Self is safely
hidden by what you have made. Here is a world established that is sick,
and this the world the body's eyes perceive. Here are the sounds it
hears—the voices which its ears were made to hear. Yet sights and sounds
the body can perceive are meaningless. It cannot see nor hear. It does
not know what seeing *is*, what listening is *for*. It is as little able
to perceive as it can judge or understand or know. Its eyes are blind;
its ears are deaf. It cannot think, and so it cannot have effects.

<sup>51</sup> What is there God created to be sick? And what that He created not
can be? Let not your eyes behold a dream, your ears bear witness to
illusion. They were made to look upon a world that is not there, to hear
the voices that can make no sound. Yet are there other sounds and other
sights which *can* be seen and heard and understood. For eyes and ears
are senses without sense, and what they see and hear they but report. It
is not they that hear and see, but *you*, who put together every jagged
piece, each senseless scrap and shred of evidence, and make a witness to
the world you want. Let not the body's ears and eyes perceive these
countless fragments seen within the gap which you imagined, and let them
persuade their maker his imaginings \[were\] real.

<sup>52</sup> Creation proves reality because it shares the function all creation
shares. It is not made of little bits of glass, a piece of wood, a
thread or two perhaps, all put together to attest its truth. Reality
does not depend on this. There *is* no gap which separates the truth
from dreams and from illusions. Truth has left no room for them in any
place or time. For it fills every place and every time and makes them
wholly indivisible.

<sup>53</sup> You who believe there *is* a little gap between you, do not
understand that it is here that you are kept as prisoners in a world
perceived to be existing here. The world you see does not exist because
the place where you perceive it is not real. The gap is carefully
concealed in fog, and misty pictures rise to cover it with vague,
uncertain forms and changing shapes, forever unsubstantial and unsure.
Yet in the gap is *nothing*. And there *are* no awesome secrets and no
darkened tombs where terror rises from the bones of death. Look at the
little gap, and you behold the innocence and emptiness of sin that you
will see within yourself when you have lost the fear of *recognizing*
love.

