---
chapter: Twenty Eight
ctitle: The Undoing of Fear
title: Reversing Effect and Cause
ref: Tx.28.III
---

<sup>16</sup> Without a cause there can be no effects, and yet without effects
there is no cause. The cause a cause is *made* by its effects; the
Father is a father by His Son. Effects do not create their cause, but
they establish its causation. Thus, the Son gives fatherhood to his
Creator and receives the gift that he has given Him. It is *because* he
is God's Son that he must also be a father who creates as God created
him. The circle of creation has no end. Its starting and its ending are
the same. But in itself it holds the universe of all creation, without
beginning and without an end.

<sup>17</sup> Fatherhood *is* creation. Love must be extended. Purity is not
confined. It is the nature of the innocent to be forever uncontained,
without a barrier or limitation. Thus is purity not of the body. Nor can
it be found where limitation is. The body can be healed by its effects,
which are as limitless as is itself. Yet must all healing come about
because the mind is recognized as not within the body, and its innocence
is quite apart from it and where *all* healing is. Where then is
healing? Only where its cause is given its effects. For sickness is a
meaningless attempt to give effects to causelessness and *make* it be a
cause.

<sup>18</sup> Always in sickness does the Son of God attempt to make himself his
cause and not allow himself to be his Father's Son. For this impossible
desire, he does not believe that he is Love's effect and must be cause
because of what he is. The cause of healing is the only Cause of
everything. It has but *one* effect. And in that recognition,
causelessness is given no effects and none are seen. A mind within a
body and a world of other bodies, each with separate minds, are your
“creations,” you the “other” mind, creating with effects unlike
yourself. And as their “father,” you must be like them. Nothing at all
has happened but that you have put yourself to sleep and dreamed a dream
in which you were an alien to yourself and but a part of someone else's
dream.

<sup>19</sup> The miracle does not awaken you but merely shows you who the dreamer
*is*. It teaches you there is a choice of dreams while you are still
asleep, depending on the purpose of your dreaming. Do you wish for
dreams of healing or for dreams of death? A dream is like a memory in
that it pictures what you *wanted* shown to you. An empty storehouse
with an open door holds all your shreds of memories and dreams. Yet if
you are the dreamer, you perceive this much at least—that *you* have
caused the dream and can accept another dream as well. But for this
change in content of the dream, it must be realized that it is you who
dreamed the dreaming that you do not like. It is but an effect which
*you* have caused, and you would not *be* cause of this effect.

<sup>20</sup> In dreams of murder and attack are you the victim in a dying body
slain. But in forgiving dreams is no one asked to be the victim and the
sufferer. These are the happy dreams the miracle exchanges for your own.
It does not ask you make another—only that you see you made the one you
would exchange for this. This world is causeless, as is every dream that
anyone has dreamed within the world. No plans are possible and no design
exists that could be found and understood.

<sup>21</sup> What else could be expected from a thing that has no cause? Yet if it
has no cause, it has no purpose. You may cause a dream, but never will
you give it real effects. For that would change its cause, and it is
this you cannot do. The dreamer of a dream is not awake but does not
know he sleeps. He sees illusions of himself as sick or well, depressed
or happy, but without a stable cause with guaranteed effects.

<sup>22</sup> The miracle establishes you dream a dream and that its content is not
true. This is a crucial step in dealing with illusions. No one is afraid
of them when he perceives he made them up. The fear was held in place
*because* he did not see that he was author of the dream, and not a
figure in the dream. He gives *himself* the consequences which he dreams
he gave his brother. And it is but this the dream has put together and
has offered him to show him that his wishes have been done. Thus does he
fear his *own* attack but sees it at another's hands. As victim, he is
suffering from its effects but not their cause. He authored not his own
attack, and he is innocent of what he caused. The miracle does nothing
but to show him that he has done nothing. What he fears is cause without
the consequences which would *make* it cause. And so it never was.

<sup>23</sup> The separation started with the dream the Father was deprived of His
effects and powerless to keep them since He was no longer their Creator.
In the dream, the dreamer made himself, but what he made has turned
against him, taking on the role of its creator as the dreamer had. And
as he hated his Creator, so the figures in the dream have hated him. His
body is their slave which they abuse because the motives he has given it
have they adopted as their own. And hate it for the vengeance it would
offer them. It is their vengeance on the body which appears to prove the
dreamer could not be the maker of the dream. Effect and cause are first
split off and then reversed, so that effect becomes a cause; the cause,
effect.

<sup>24</sup> This is the separation's final step with which salvation, which
proceeds to go the *other* way, begins. This final step is an effect of
what has gone before, appearing as a cause. The miracle is the first
step in giving back to cause the function of causation, not effect. For
this confusion has produced the dream, and while it lasts, will wakening
be feared. Nor will the call to wakening be heard, because it seems to
be the call to fear.

<sup>25</sup> Like every lesson which the Holy Spirit requests you learn, the
miracle is clear. It demonstrates what He would have you learn and shows
you its effects are what you *want*. In His forgiving dreams are the
effects of yours undone and hated enemies perceived as friends with
merciful intent. Their enmity is seen as causeless now, because they did
not make it. And you can accept the role of maker of their hate, because
you *see* that it has no effects. Now are you freed from this much of
the dream; the world is neutral, and the bodies which still seem to move
about as separate things need not be feared. And so they are not sick.

<sup>26</sup> The miracle returns the cause of fear to you who made it. But it also
shows that, having no effects, it is not cause because the function of
causation is to have effects. And where effects are gone, there *is* no
cause. Thus is the body healed by miracles because they show the mind
*made* sickness and employed the body to be victim or effect of what it
made. Yet half the lesson will not teach the whole. The miracle is
useless if you learn but that the body can be healed, for this is not
the lesson it was sent to teach. The lesson is the *mind* was sick that
thought the body could be sick; projecting out its guilt caused nothing
and had no effects.

<sup>27</sup> This world is full of miracles. They stand in shining silence next to
every dream of pain and suffering, of sin and guilt. They are the
dream's alternative, the choice to be the dreamer rather than deny the
active role in making up the dream. They are the glad effects of taking
back the consequence of sickness to its cause. The body is released
because the mind acknowledges “this is not done to me, but *I* am doing
this.” And thus the mind is free to make another choice instead.
Beginning here, salvation will proceed to change the course of every
step in the descent to separation, until all the steps have been
retraced, the ladder gone, and all the dreaming of the world undone.

