---
chapter: Twenty Eight
ctitle: The Undoing of Fear
title: The Greater Joining
ref: Tx.28.V
---

<sup>37</sup> Accepting the Atonement for yourself means not to give support to
someone's dream of sickness and of death. It means that you share not
his wish to separate and let him turn illusions on himself. Nor do you
wish that they be turned instead on you. Thus have they *no* effects.
And you are free of dreams of pain because you let him be. Unless you
help him, you will suffer pain with him because that is your wish. And
you become a figure in his dream of pain, as he in yours. So do you both
become illusions and without identity. You could be anyone or anything,
depending on whose evil dream you share. You can be sure of just one
thing—that you are evil, for you share in dreams of fear.

<sup>38</sup> There is a way of finding certainty right *here* and *now.* Refuse to
be a part of fearful dreams whatever form they take, for you *will* lose
identity in them. You *find* yourself by not accepting them as causing
you and giving you effects. You stand apart from them but not apart from
him who dreams them. Thus you separate the dreamer from the dream and
join \[with\] one but let the other *go*. The dream is but illusion in
the mind. And with the mind you *would* unite, but *never* with the
dream. It is the dream you fear and *not* the mind. You see them as the
same because you think that *you* are but a dream. And what is real and
what is but illusion in yourself you do not know and cannot tell apart.

<sup>39</sup> Like you, your brother thinks he is a dream. Share not in his
illusion of himself, for your identity depends on his reality. Think
rather of him as a mind in which illusions still persist, but as a mind
which brother is to you. He is not brother made by what he dreams, nor
is his body, “hero” of the dream, your brother. It is his *reality* that
is your brother, as is yours to him. Your mind and his are joined in
brotherhood. His body and his dreams but seem to make a little gap,
where yours have joined with his.

<sup>40</sup> And yet, between your minds there *is* no gap. To join his dreams is
thus to meet him not because his dreams would separate from you.
Therefore, release him, merely by your claim on brotherhood and not on
dreams of fear. Let him acknowledge who he is by not supporting his
illusions by your faith, for if you do, you will have faith in *yours.*
With faith in yours, *he* will not be released, and *you* are kept in
bondage to his dream. And dreams of fear will haunt the little gap,
inhabited but by illusions which you have supported in each other's
minds.

<sup>41</sup> Be certain, if you do your part, he will do his, for he will join you
where you stand. Call not to him to meet you in the gap between you, or
you must believe that it is your reality as well as his. You *cannot* do
his part, but this you *do* when you become a passive figure in his
dream instead of dreamer of your own. Identity in dreams is meaningless
because the dreamer and the dream are one. Who *shares* a dream must
*be* the dream he shares because by sharing is a cause produced.

<sup>42</sup> You share confusion and you *are* confused, for in the gap no stable
self exists. What is the same seems different because what is the same
appears to be unlike. His dreams are yours because you *let* them be.
But if you took your own away would he be free of them and of his own as
well. Your dreams are witnesses to his, and his attest the truth of
yours. Yet if you see there *is* no truth in yours, his dreams will
\[disappear before his eyes\], and he will understand what *made* the
dream.

<sup>43</sup> The Holy Spirit is in *both* your minds, and He is One because there
is no gap that separates His Oneness from Itself. The gap between your
bodies matters not, for what is joined in Him is *always* one. No one is
sick if someone else accepts his union with him. His desire to be a sick
and separated mind cannot remain without a witness or a cause. And
*both* are gone if someone wills to be united with him. He has
dream\[ed\] that he was separated from his brother who, by sharing not
his dream, has left the space between them vacant. And the Father comes
to join His Son the Holy Spirit joined.

<sup>44</sup> The Holy Spirit's function is to take the broken picture of the Son
of God and put the pieces into place again. This holy picture, healed
entirely, does He hold out to every separate piece that thinks it is a
picture in itself. To each he offers his identity, which the whole
picture represents, instead of just a little broken bit which he
insisted was himself. And when he sees *this* picture, he will recognize
himself. If you share not your brother's evil dream, this *is* the
picture that the miracle will place within the little gap, left clean of
all the seeds of sickness and of sin. And here the Father will receive
His Son, because His Son was gracious to himself.

<sup>45</sup> I thank you, Father, knowing you will come to close each little gap
that lies between the broken pieces of Your holy Son. Your holiness,
complete and perfect, lies in every one of them. And they *are* joined
because what is in one is in them all. How holy is the smallest grain of
sand when it is recognized as being part of the completed picture of
God's Son! The forms the broken pieces seem to take mean nothing. For
the whole is in each one. And every aspect of the Son of God is just the
same as every other part.

<sup>46</sup> Join not your brother's dreams but join with *him*, and where you
join His Son, the Father is. Who seeks for substitutes when he perceives
he has lost nothing? Who would *want* to have the “benefits” of sickness
when he has received the simple happiness of health? What God has given
cannot *be* a loss, and what is not of Him has no effects. What then
would you perceive within the gap? The seeds of sickness come from the
belief that there is *joy* in separation, and its giving up would be a
*sacrifice*. But miracles are the result when you do not insist on
seeing in the gap what is not there. Your willingness to *let* illusions
go is all the Healer of God's Son requires. He will place the miracle of
healing where the seeds of sickness were. And there will be *no* loss,
but *only* gain.

