---
chapter: Twenty Eight
ctitle: The Undoing of Fear
title: The Beautiful Relationship
ref: Tx.28.VIII
---

<sup>60</sup> God asks for nothing, and His Son, like Him, need ask for nothing.
For there is no lack in him. An empty space, a little gap, would be a
lack. And it is only there that he could want for something he has not.
A space where God is not, a gap between the Father and the Son is not
the will of either, who have promised to be one. God's promise is a
promise to *Himself*, and there is no one who could be untrue to what He
wills as part of what He *is.* The promise that there is no gap between
Himself and what He is cannot be false. What will can come between what
*must* be one, and in Whose wholeness there can *be* no gap?

<sup>61</sup> The beautiful relationship you have with all your brothers is a part
of you because it is a part of God Himself. Are you not sick if you deny
yourself your wholeness and your health, the Source of help, the Call to
healing, and the Call to heal? Your savior waits for healing, and the
world waits with him. Nor are you apart from it. For healing will be one
or not at all, its oneness being where the healing lies. What could
correct for separation but its opposite? There is no middle ground in
any aspect of salvation. You accept it wholly or accept it not. What is
unseparated must be joined. And what is joined cannot be separate.

<sup>62</sup> Either there is a gap between you and your brother, or you *are* as
one. There is no in between, no other choice, and no allegiance to be
split between the two. A split allegiance is but faithlessness to both
and merely sets you spinning round, to grasp uncertainly at any straw
that seems to hold some promise of relief. Yet who can build his home
upon a straw and count on it as shelter from the wind? The body can be
made a home like this because it lacks foundation in the truth. And yet,
*because* it does, it can be seen as *not* your home but merely as an
aid to help you reach the home where God abides.

<sup>63</sup> With *this* as purpose *is* the body healed. It is not used to
witness to the dream of separation and disease. Nor is it idly blamed
for what it did not do. It serves to help the healing of God's Son, and
for *this* purpose it cannot *be* sick. It will not join a purpose not
your own, and you have *chosen* that it not be sick. All miracles are
based upon this choice and given you the instant it is made. No forms of
sickness are immune because the choice cannot be made in terms of form.
The choice of sickness *seems* to be a form, yet it is one, as is its
opposite. And *you* are sick or well accordingly.

<sup>64</sup> But never you alone. This world is but the dream that you can *be*
alone and think without affecting those apart from you. To be alone must
mean you are apart, and if you are, you cannot *but* be sick. This seems
to prove that you must be apart. Yet all it means is that you tried to
keep a promise to be true to faithlessness. Yet faithlessness *is*
sickness. It is like the house set upon straw. It seems to be quite
solid and substantial in itself. Yet its stability cannot be judged
apart from its foundation. If it rests on straw, there is no need to bar
the door and lock the windows and make fast the bolts. The wind *will*
topple it, and rain *will* come and carry it into oblivion.

<sup>65</sup> What is the sense in seeking to be safe in what was *made* for danger
and for fear? Why burden it with further locks and chains and heavy
anchors when its weakness lies not in itself but in the frailty of the
little gap of nothingness whereon it stands? What *can* be safe which
rests upon a shadow? Would you build your home upon what will collapse
beneath a feather's weight?

<sup>66</sup> Your home is built upon your brother's health, upon his happiness,
his sinlessness, and everything his Father promised him. No secret
promise you have made instead has shaken the Foundation of his home. The
winds will blow upon it, and the rain will beat against it but with no
effect. The world will wash away, and yet this house will stand forever,
for its strength lies not within itself alone. It is an ark of safety,
resting on God's promise that His Son is safe forever in Himself. What
gap can interpose itself between the safety of this shelter and its
Source? From here the body can be seen as what it is and neither less
nor more in worth than the extent to which it can be used to liberate
God's Son unto his home. And with this holy purpose is it made a home of
holiness a little while because it shares your Father's Will with *you.*

