---
chapter: Twenty Eight
ctitle: The Undoing of Fear
title: The Present Memory
ref: Tx.28.II
---

<sup>4</sup> The Holy Spirit can indeed make use of memory, for God Himself is
there. Yet this is not a memory of past events, but only of a present
state. You are so long accustomed to believe that memory holds only what
is past that it is hard for you to realize it is a skill that can
remember *now*. The limitations on remembering the world imposes on it
are as vast as those you let the world impose on you. There *is* no link
of memory to the past. If you would have it there, then there it is. But
only your *desire* made the link, and only you have held it to a part of
time where guilt appears to linger still.

<sup>5</sup> The Holy Spirit's use of memory is quite apart from time. He does not
seek to use it as a means to keep the past, but rather as a way to let
it *go*. Memory holds the message it receives and does what it is given
it to do. It does not write the message nor appoint what it is for. Like
to the body, it is purposeless within itself. And if it seems to serve
to cherish ancient hate and offers you the pictures of injustices and
hurts which you were saving, this is what you asked its message be, and
this is what it is. Committed to its vaults, the history of all the
body's past is hidden there. All of the strange associations made to
keep the past alive, the present dead, are stored within it, waiting
your command that they be brought to you and lived again. And thus do
their effects appear to be increased by time, which took away their
cause.

<sup>6</sup> Yet time is but another phase of what does nothing. It works hand in
hand with all the other attributes with which you seek to keep concealed
the truth about yourself. Time neither takes away nor can restore. And
yet you make strange use of it, as if the past had caused the present,
which is but a consequence in which no change can be made possible
because its cause has gone. Yet change must have a cause that will
endure or else it will not last. No change can be made in the present if
its cause is past. Only the past is held in memory as you make use of
it, and so it is a way to hold the past *against* the now.

<sup>7</sup> Remember *nothing* that you taught yourself, for you were badly
taught. And who would keep a senseless lesson in his mind when he can
learn and can preserve a better one? When ancient memories of hate
appear, remember that their cause is gone. And so you cannot understand
what they are for. Let not the cause that you would give them now be
what it was which made them what they were or seemed to be. Be glad that
it is gone, for this is what you would be pardoned from. And see instead
the new effects of cause accepted *now*, with consequences *here.* They
will surprise you with their loveliness. The ancient new ideas they
bring will be the happy consequences of a cause so ancient that it far
exceeds the span of memory which your perception sees.

<sup>8</sup> This is the Cause the Holy Spirit has remembered for you, when you
would forget. It is not past because He let It not be unremembered. It
has never changed because there never was a time in which He did not
keep It safely in your mind. Its consequences will indeed seem new
because you thought that you remembered not their Cause. Yet was It
never absent from your mind, for it was not your Father's Will that He
be unremembered by His \[only\] Son.

<sup>9</sup> What *you* remember never was. It came from causelessness which you
confused with cause. It can deserve but laughter when you learn you have
remembered consequences which were causeless and could *never* be
effects. The miracle reminds you of a Cause forever present, perfectly
untouched by time and interference—never changed from what It *is.* And
*you* are Its effects, as changeless and as perfect as Itself. Its
memory does not lie in the past nor await the future. It is not revealed
in miracles. They but remind you that It has not gone. When you forgive
It for your sins, It will no longer be denied.

<sup>10</sup> You who have sought to lay a judgment on your own Creator cannot
understand it is not He Who laid a judgment on His Son. You would deny
Him His effects, yet have they never been denied. There was no time in
which His Son could be condemned for what was causeless and against His
Will. What your remembering would witness to is but the fear of God. He
has not done the thing you fear. No more have you. And so your innocence
has not been lost. You need no healing to be healed. In quietness, see
in the miracle a lesson in allowing Cause to have Its *own* effects and
doing nothing that would interfere.

<sup>11</sup> The miracle comes quietly into the mind that stops an instant and is
still. It reaches gently from that quiet time, and from the mind it
healed in quiet then, to other minds to share its quietness. And they
will join in doing nothing to prevent its radiant extension back into
the mind Which caused all minds to be. Born out of sharing, there can be
no pause in time to cause the miracle delay in hastening to all unquiet
minds and bringing them an instant's stillness when the memory of God
returns to them. Their own remembering is quiet now, and what has come
to take its place will not be wholly unremembered afterwards.

<sup>12</sup> He to Whom time is given offers thanks for every quiet instant given
Him. For in that instant is His memory allowed to offer all its
treasures to the Son of God, for whom they have been kept. How gladly
does He offer them unto the one for whom He has been given them! And His
Creator shares His thanks because He would not be deprived of His
effects. The instant's silence that His Son accepts gives welcome to
eternity and Him and lets Them enter where They would abide. For in that
instant does the Son of God do nothing that would make himself afraid.

<sup>13</sup> How instantly the memory of God arises in the mind that has no fear
to keep the memory away. Its own remembering has gone. There is no past
to keep its fearful image in the way of glad awakening to present peace.
The trumpets of eternity resound throughout the stillness, yet disturb
it not. And what is now remembered is not fear, but rather is the cause
that fear was made to render unremembered and undone. The stillness
speaks in gentle sounds of love the Son of God remembers from before his
own remembering came in between the present and the past to shut them
out.

<sup>14</sup> Now is the Son of God at last aware of present Cause and Its benign
effects. Now does he understand what he has made is causeless, making no
effects at all. He has done nothing. And in seeing this, he understands
he never had a need for doing anything and never did. His Cause *is* Its
effects. There never was a cause beside It that could generate a
different past or future. Its effects are changelessly eternal, beyond
fear, and past the world of sin entirely.

<sup>15</sup> What has been lost, to see the causeless not? And where is sacrifice,
when memory of God has come to take the place of loss? What better way
to close the little gap between illusions and reality than to allow the
memory of God to flow across it, making it a bridge an instant will
suffice to reach beyond? For God has closed it with Himself. His memory
has not gone by and left a stranded Son forever on a shore where he can
glimpse another shore which he can never reach. His Father wills that he
be lifted up and gently carried over. *He* has built the bridge, and it
is He Who will transport His Son across it. Have no fear that He will
fail in what He wills. Nor that you be excluded from the Will that is
for you.

