---
chapter: Twenty Eight
ctitle: The Undoing of Fear
title: The Secret Vows
ref: Tx.28.VII
---

<sup>54</sup> Who punishes the body is insane. For here the little gap is seen, and
yet it is not here. It has not judged itself nor made itself to be what
it is not. It does not seek to make of pain a joy and look for lasting
pleasure in the dust. It does not tell you what its purpose is and
cannot understand what it is for. It does not victimize because it has
no will, no preferences, and no doubts. It does not wonder what it is.
And so it has no need to be competitive. It *can* be victimized but
*cannot* feel itself as victim. It accepts no role but does what it is
told, without attack.

<sup>55</sup> It is indeed a senseless point of view to hold responsible for sight
a thing that cannot see and blame it for the sounds you do not like,
although it cannot hear. It suffers not the punishment you give because
it has no feeling. It behaves in ways you want but never makes the
choice. It is not born and does not die. It can but follow aimlessly the
path on which it has been set. And if that path is changed, it walks as
easily another way. It takes no sides and judges not the road it
travels. It perceives no gap because it does not hate. It can be *used*
for hate, but it cannot be hateful made thereby.

<sup>56</sup> The thing you hate and fear and loathe and *want*, the body does not
know. You send it forth to seek for separation and to be a separate
thing. And *then* you hate it, not for what it is, but for the uses you
have made of it. You shrink from what it sees and what it hears and hate
its frailty and littleness. And you despise its acts but not your own.
It sees and acts for *you*. It hears *your* voice. And it is frail and
little by *your* wish. It seems to punish you and thus deserve your
hatred for the limitations which it brings to you. Yet you have made of
it a symbol for the limitations which you want your *mind* to have and
see and *keep*.

<sup>57</sup> The body *represents* the gap between the little bit of mind you call
your own and all the rest of what is *really* yours. You hate it, yet
you think it *is* your self and that without it would your self be lost.
This is the secret vow which you have made with every brother who would
walk apart. This is the secret oath you take again, whenever you
perceive yourself attacked. No one can suffer if he does not see himself
attacked and *losing* by attack. Unstated and unheard in consciousness
is every pledge to sickness. Yet it is a promise to another to be hurt
by him and to attack him in return.

<sup>58</sup> Sickness is anger taken out upon the body, so that *it* will suffer
pain. It is the obvious effect of what was made in secret, in agreement
with another's secret wish to be apart from you, as you would be apart
from him. Unless you *both* agree that is your wish, it can have no
effects. Whoever says, “There *is* no gap between my mind and yours” has
kept God's promise, not his tiny oath to be forever faithful unto death.
And by his healing is his brother healed.

<sup>59</sup> Let this be your agreement with each one—that you be one with him and
not apart. And he will keep the promise that you make with him because
it is the one which he has made to God, as God has made to him. God
keeps His promises; His Son keeps his. In his creation did his Father
say, “You are beloved of Me and I of you forever. Be you perfect as
Myself, for you can never be apart from Me.” His Son remembers not that
he replied “I will,” though in that promise he was born. Yet God reminds
him of it every time he does not share a promise to be sick but lets his
mind be healed and unified. His secret vows are powerless before the
Will of God, Whose promises he shares. And what he substitutes is not
his will, who has made promise of himself to God.

