---
chapter: Twenty Eight
ctitle: The Undoing of Fear
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.28.I
---

The miracle does nothing. All it does is to *undo*. And thus it cancels
out the interference to what has been done. It does not add, but merely
takes away. And what it takes away is long since gone, but being kept in
memory, appears to have immediate effects. This world was over long ago.
The thoughts that made it are no longer in the mind that thought of them
and loved them for a little while. The miracle but shows the past is
gone, and what has truly gone has no effects. Remembering a cause can
but produce illusions of its presence, not effects.

<sup>2</sup> All the effects of guilt are here no more. For guilt is over. In its
passing went its consequences, left without a cause. Why would you cling
to it in memory if you did not *desire* its effects? Remembering is as
selective as perception, being its past tense. It is perception of the
past as if it were occurring now and still were there to see. Memory,
like perception, is a skill made up by you to take the place of what God
gave in your creation. And like all the things you made, it can be used
to serve another purpose and to be the means for something else. It can
be used to heal and not to hurt if you so wish it be.

<sup>3</sup> Nothing employed for healing represents an effort to do anything at
all. It is a recognition that you have no needs which mean that
something must be done. It is an unselective memory, which is not used
to interfere with truth. All things the Holy Spirit can employ for
healing have been given Him, without the content and the purposes for
which they have been made. They are but skills without an application.
They *await* their use. They have no dedication and no aim.

