---
chapter: Seventeen
ctitle: Forgiveness and Healing
title: Perception and the Two Worlds
ref: Tx.17.V
---

<sup>27</sup> God established His relationship with you to make you happy, and
nothing you do which does not share His purpose can be real. The purpose
God ascribed to anything is its only function. Because of His reason for
creating His relationship with you, the function of relationships became
forever “to make happy.” *And nothing else*. To fulfill this function,
you relate to your creations as God to His. For nothing God created is
apart from happiness, and nothing God created but would *extend*
happiness as its Creator did. Whatever fulfills this function not
*cannot* be real.

<sup>28</sup> In this world it is impossible to create, yet it *is* possible to
make happy. We have said repeatedly that the Holy Spirit would not
*deprive* you of your special relationships but would *transform* them.
And by that all that is meant is that He will restore to them the
function given them by God. The function you have given them is clearly
*not* to make happy. But the holy relationship shares God's purpose,
rather than aiming to make a substitute for it. Every special
relationship which *you* have made is a substitute for God's Will and
glorifies yours instead of His because of the delusion that they are
*different*.

<sup>29</sup> You have made very real relationships even in this world which you do
not recognize simply because you have raised their substitutes to such
predominance that when truth calls to you, as it does constantly, you
answer with a substitute. Every special relationship which you have ever
undertaken has as its fundamental purpose the aim of occupying your
minds so completely that you will not *hear* the call of truth. In a
sense the special relationship was the ego's answer to the creation of
the Holy Spirit, Who was God's answer to the separation. For although
the ego did not understand what had been created, it *was* aware of
threat.

<sup>30</sup> The whole defense system which the ego evolved to protect the
separation from the Holy Spirit was in response to the gift with which
God blessed it and by His blessing enabled it to be healed. This
blessing holds within *itself* the truth about everything. And the truth
is that the Holy Spirit is in close relationship with you because in Him
is your relationship with God restored to you. The relationship with Him
has *never* been broken because the Holy Spirit has not been separate
from anyone since the separation. And through Him have all your holy
relationships been carefully preserved to serve God's purpose for you.

<sup>31</sup> The ego is hyperalert to threat, and the part of your mind into which
the ego was accepted is very anxious to preserve its reason as it sees
it. It does not realize that it is totally insane. And you must realize
just what this means if *you* would be restored to sanity. The insane
protect their thought systems, but they do so *insanely*. And *all*
their defenses are as insane as what they are supposed to protect. The
separation has *nothing* in it, no part, no “reason,” and no attribute
that is *not* insane. And its “protection” is part of it, as insane as
the whole. The special relationship, which is its chief defense, *must*
therefore be insane.

<sup>32</sup> You have but little difficulty now in realizing that the thought
system which the special relationship protects is but a system of
delusions. You recognize, at least in general terms, that the ego is
insane. Yet the special relationship still seems to you somehow to be
“different.” Yet we have looked at it far closer than at many other
aspects of the ego's thought system which you have been more willing to
let go. While this one remains, you will *not* let the others go. For
this one is *not* different. Retain this one, and you *have* retained
the whole.

<sup>33</sup> It is essential to realize that all defenses *do* what they would
*defend*. The underlying basis for their effectiveness is that they
*offer* what they defend. What they defend is placed *in* them for
safekeeping, and as they operate, they *bring* it to you. Every defense
operates by giving gifts, and the gift is *always* a miniature of the
thought system the defense protects, set in a golden frame. The frame is
very elaborate, all set with jewels and deeply carved and polished. Its
purpose is to be of value *in itself* and to divert your attention from
what it encloses. But the frame *without* the picture you cannot have.
Defenses operate to make you think you *can*.

<sup>34</sup> The special relationship has the most imposing and deceptive frame of
all the defenses the ego uses. Its thought system is offered here,
surrounded by a frame so heavy and so elaborate that the picture is
almost obliterated by its imposing structure. Into the frame are woven
all sorts of fanciful and fragmented illusions of love, set with dreams
of sacrifice and self-aggrandizement and interlaced with gilded threads
of self-destruction. The glitter of blood shines like rubies, and the
tears are faceted like diamonds and gleam in the dim light in which the
offering is made.

<sup>35</sup> Look at the *picture*. Do not let the frame distract you. This gift
is given you for your damnation, and if you take it, you will believe
that you *are* damned. You *cannot* have the frame without the picture.
What you value is the *frame*, for there you see no conflict. Yet the
frame is only the wrapping for the gift of conflict. The frame is *not*
the gift. Be not deceived by the most superficial aspects of this
thought system, for these aspects enclose the whole, complete in *every*
aspect. Death lies in this glittering gift. Let not your gaze dwell on
the hypnotic gleaming of the frame. Look at the *picture*, and realize
that *death* is offered you.

<sup>36</sup> That is why the holy instant is so important in the defense of truth.
The truth itself *needs* no defense, but you *do* need defense against
your own acceptance of the gift of death. When you who are truth accept
an idea so dangerous *to* truth, you threaten truth with destruction.
And your defense must now be undertaken to keep truth *whole*. The power
of Heaven, the love of God, the tears of Christ, and the joy of His
eternal Spirit are marshaled to defend you from your own attack. For you
attack Them, being *part* of Them, and They must save you, for They love
Themselves.

<sup>37</sup> The holy instant is a miniature of Heaven, sent you *from* Heaven. It
is a picture, too, set in a frame. Yet if you accept *this* gift, you
will not see the frame at all because the gift can only be accepted
through your willingness to focus *all* your attention on the *picture*.
The holy instant is a miniature of eternity. It is a picture of
timelessness, set in a frame of time. If you focus on the picture, you
will realize that it was only the frame that made you think it *was* a
picture. Without the frame, the picture is seen as what it *represents*.
For as the whole thought system of the ego lies in its gifts, so the
whole of Heaven lies in this instant, borrowed from eternity and set in
time for you.

<sup>38</sup> Two gifts are offered you. Each is complete and cannot be partially
accepted. Each is a picture of all that you can have, seen *very*
differently. You cannot compare their value by comparing a picture to a
frame. It must be the pictures only that you compare, or the comparison
is wholly without meaning. Remember that it is the picture that is the
gift. And only on this basis are you *really* free to choose. Look at
the pictures. *Both* of them. One is a tiny picture, hard to see at all
beneath the heavy shadows of its enormous and disproportionate
enclosure. The other is lightly framed and hung in light, lovely to look
upon for what it *is*.

<sup>39</sup> You who have tried so hard and are *still* trying to fit the better
picture into the wrong frame and so combine what cannot *be* combined,
accept this and be glad: these pictures are each framed perfectly for
what they represent. One is framed to be out of focus and not seen. The
other is framed for perfect clarity. The picture of darkness and of
death grows less convincing as you search it out amid its wrappings. As
each senseless stone which seems to shine in darkness from the frame is
exposed to light, it becomes dull and lifeless and ceases to distract
you from the picture. And finally you look upon the picture itself,
seeing at last that, unprotected by the frame, it *has* no meaning.

<sup>40</sup> The other picture is lightly framed, for time cannot contain
eternity. There *is* no distraction here. The picture of Heaven and
eternity grows *more* convincing as you look at it. And now by *real*
comparison a transformation of both pictures can at last occur. And each
is given its rightful place, when both are seen in relation to each
other. The dark picture brought to light is not perceived as fearful,
but the fact that it is just a *picture* is brought home at last. And
what you see there, you will recognize as what it is—a picture of what
you *thought* was real and nothing more. For beyond this picture, you
will see nothing.

<sup>41</sup> The picture of light, in clear cut and unmistakable contrast, is
transformed *into* what lies beyond the picture. As you look on this,
you realize that it is *not* a picture but a *reality*. This is no
figured representation of a thought system, but the Thought Itself. What
*it* represents is *there*. The frame fades gently, and God rises to
your remembrance, offering you the whole of creation in exchange for
your little picture, wholly without value and entirely deprived of
meaning.

<sup>42</sup> As God ascends into His rightful place and you to yours, you will
experience again the *meaning* of relationship and know it to be true.
Let us ascend in peace together to the Father by giving *Him* ascendance
in our minds. We will gain *everything* by giving Him the power and the
glory and keeping no illusions of where they are. They are in *us*
through *His* ascendance. What He has given is *His*. It shines in every
part of Him as in the whole. The whole reality of your relationship with
Him lies in *our* relationship to one another. The holy instant shines
alike on all relationships, for in it they *are* one. For here is only
healing, *already* complete and perfect. For here is God, and where He
is, only the perfect and complete *can* be.

