---
chapter: Seventeen
ctitle: Forgiveness and Healing
title: Shadows of the Past
ref: Tx.17.IV
---

<sup>14</sup> To forgive is merely to remember only the *loving* thoughts you gave
in the past and those that were given you. All the rest must be
forgotten. Forgiveness is a selective remembering, based not on *your*
selection. For the shadow figures you would make immortal are “enemies”
of reality. Be willing to forgive the Son of God for what he did *not*
do. The shadow figures are the witnesses you bring with you to
demonstrate he did what he did *not*. Because you brought them, you will
hear them. And you who kept them by your *own* selection do not
understand how they came into your minds and what their purpose is.

<sup>15</sup> They represent the evil that you *think* was done to you. You bring
them with you only that you may return evil for evil, hoping that their
witness will enable you to think guiltily of another and *not* harm
yourself. They speak so clearly for the separation that no one not
obsessed with *keeping* separation could hear them. They offer you the
“reasons” why you should enter into unholy alliances which support the
ego's goals and make your relationships the witness to its power. It is
these shadow figures which would make the *ego* holy in your sight and
teach you what you do to keep *it* safe is really love.

<sup>16</sup> The shadow figures *always* speak for vengeance, and all
relationships into which they enter are totally insane. Without
exception, these relationships have as their *purpose* the exclusion of
the truth about the other and of *yourself*. This is why you see in
*both* what is not there and make of both the slaves of vengeance. And
why whatever reminds you of your past grievances, no matter how
distorted the associations by which you arrive at the remembrance may
be, attracts you and seems to you to go by the name of love. And finally
why all such relationships become the attempt at union through the
*body*, for *only* bodies can be seen as means for vengeance. That
bodies are central to all unholy relationships is evident. Your *own*
experience has taught you this. But what you do not realize are *all*
the reasons which go to make the relationship unholy. For unholiness
seeks to *reinforce* itself, as holiness does, by gathering to itself
what it perceives as like itself.

<sup>17</sup> In the unholy relationship, it is not the body of the *other* with
which union is attempted but the bodies of those who are not *there*.
Even the body of the other, already a severely limited perception of
him, is not the central focus as it is or in entirety. What can be used
for fantasies of vengeance and what can be most readily associated with
those on whom vengeance is *really* sought are centered on and separated
*off* as being the only parts of value. Every step taken in the making,
the maintaining, and the breaking off of the unholy relationship is a
move toward further fragmentation and unreality. The shadow figures
enter more and more, and the one in whom they seem to be *decreases* in
importance.

<sup>18</sup> Time is indeed unkind to the unholy relationship. For time *is* cruel
in the ego's hands, as it is kind when used for gentleness. The
attraction of the unholy relationship begins to fade and to be
questioned almost at once. Once it is formed, doubt *must* enter in
because its purpose *is* impossible. The only such relationships which
retain the fantasies that center on them are those which have been
dreamed of but have not been made at all. Where no reality has entered,
there is nothing to intrude upon the dream of happiness. Yet consider
what this means—the *more* reality that enters into the unholy
relationship, the *less satisfying* it becomes. And the more the
*fantasies* can encompass, the *greater* the satisfaction seems to be.

<sup>19</sup> The “ideal” of the unholy relationship thus becomes one in which the
reality of the other does not enter *at all* to “spoil” the dream. And
the less the other *really* brings to it, the “better” it becomes. Thus,
the attempt at union becomes a way of excluding even the one with whom
the union was sought. For it was formed to get him *out* of it and join
with fantasies in uninterrupted “bliss.” How can the Holy Spirit bring
His interpretation of the body as a means of communication into
relationships whose only purpose is *separation* from reality? What
forgiveness *is* enables Him to do so.

<sup>20</sup> If *all* but loving thoughts has been forgotten, what remains *is*
eternal. And the transformed past is made like the *present*. No longer
does the past conflict with *now*. *This* continuity *extends* the
present by increasing its reality and its *value* in your perception of
it. In these loving thoughts is the spark of beauty hidden in the
ugliness of the unholy relationship in which the hatred is remembered,
yet *there* to come alive as the relationship is given to Him Who gives
it life and beauty. That is why Atonement centers on the past, which is
the *source* of separation, and where it must be undone. For separation
must be corrected where it was *made*. The ego seeks to “resolve” its
problems, not at their source, but where they were *not* made. And thus
it seeks to guarantee there *will* be no solution.

<sup>21</sup> The Holy Spirit wills only to make His resolutions complete and
perfect, and so He seeks and *finds* the source of problems where it
*is* and there undoes it. And with each step in His undoing is the
*separation* more and more undone and union brought closer. He is not at
all confused by any “reasons” for separation. *All* He perceives in
separation is that it must be *undone*. Let Him uncover the hidden spark
of beauty in your relationships and *show* it to you. Its loveliness
will so attract you that you will be unwilling ever to lose the sight of
it again. And you will let it transform the relationship so you can see
it more and more. For you will *want* it more and more and become
increasingly unwilling to let it be hidden from you. And you will learn
to seek for and *establish* conditions in which this beauty can be seen.

<sup>22</sup> All this you will do gladly if you but let Him hold the spark before
you to light your way and make it clear to you. God's Son is one. Whom
God has joined as one, the ego *cannot* break apart. The spark of
holiness *must* be safe, however hidden it may be, in every
relationship. For the Creator of the one relationship has left no part
of it without Himself.

<sup>23</sup> This is the *only* part of the relationship the Holy Spirit sees
because He knows that *only* this is true. You have made the
relationship unreal and therefore unholy by seeing it *where* it is not
and *as* it is not. Give the past to Him Who can change your mind about
it *for* you. But first be sure you fully realize what *you* have made
the past to represent and why.

<sup>24</sup> In brief, the past is now your justification for entering into a
continuing, unholy alliance with the ego *against* the present. For the
present *is* forgiveness. Therefore, the relationships which the unholy
alliance dictates are not perceived nor felt as *now*. Yet the frame of
reference to which the present is referred for meaning is an *illusion*
of the past in which those elements which fit the purpose of the unholy
alliance are retained and all the rest let go. And what is thus let go
is all the truth the past could ever offer to the present as witnesses
for its reality, while what is kept but witnesses to the reality of
dreams.

<sup>25</sup> It is still up to you to choose to be willing to join with truth or
illusion. But remember that to choose *one* is to let the other *go*.
Which one you choose you will endow with beauty and reality because the
choice *depends* on which you value more. The spark of beauty or the
veil of ugliness, the real world or the world of guilt and fear, truth
or illusion, freedom or slavery—it is all the same. For you can never
choose *except* between God and the ego. Thought systems are but true or
false, and all their attributes come simply from what they *are*. Only
the Thoughts of God are true. And all that follows from them comes from
what they are and is as true as is the holy Source from which they came.

<sup>26</sup> My holy brothers, I would enter into all your relationships and step
between you and your fantasies. Let *my* relationship to you be real to
you, and let me bring reality to your perception of your brothers. They
were not created to enable you to hurt yourselves through them. They
were created to *create* with you. This is the truth that I would
interpose between you and your goal of madness. Be not separate from me,
and let not the holy purpose of Atonement be lost to you in dreams of
vengeance. Relationships in which such dreams are cherished have
*excluded* me. Let me enter in the Name of God and bring you peace that
you may offer peace to me.

