---
chapter: Seventeen
ctitle: Forgiveness and Healing
title: Fantasy and Distorted Perception
ref: Tx.17.II
---

<sup>3</sup> When you maintain that there must be order of difficulty in miracles,
all you mean is that there are some things you would withhold from
truth. You believe that truth cannot deal with them only because you
would *keep* them from truth. Very simply, your lack of faith in the
power that heals all pain arises from your wish to retain some aspects
of reality for fantasy. If you but realized what this must do to your
appreciation of the whole! What you reserve unto yourself, you *take
away* from Him Who would release you. Unless you give it back, it is
inevitable that your perspective on reality be warped and uncorrected.

<sup>4</sup> As long as you would have it so, so long will the illusion of order of
difficulty in miracles remain with you. For you have *established* this
order in reality by giving some of it to one teacher and some to
another. And so you learn to deal with part of truth in one way and in
another way the other part. To fragment truth is to destroy it by
rendering it meaningless. Orders of reality is a perspective without
understanding, a frame of reference for reality to which it cannot
really *be* compared at all.

<sup>5</sup> Think you that you can bring truth to fantasy and learn what truth
means from the perspective of illusions? Truth *has* no meaning in
illusion. The frame of reference for its meaning must be *itself*. When
you try to bring truth to illusions, you are trying to make illusions
*real* and keep them by *justifying* your belief in them. But to give
illusions to truth is to enable truth to teach that the *illusions* are
unreal and thus enable you to escape from them. Reserve not one idea
aside from truth, or you establish orders of reality which must imprison
you. There *is* no order in reality because *everything* there is true.

<sup>6</sup> Be willing, then, to give all you have held outside the truth to Him
who *knows* the truth and in Whom all is brought to truth. \[Salvation
from separation will be complete or will be not at all.\] Be not
concerned with anything except your *willingness* to have this be
accomplished. *He* will accomplish it; *not* you. But forget not this:
When you become disturbed and lose your peace of mind because *another*
is attempting to solve his problems through fantasy, you are refusing to
forgive *yourself* for just this same attempt. And you are holding
*both* of you away from truth and from salvation. As you forgive him,
you restore to truth what was denied by *both* of you. And you will see
forgiveness where you have *given* it.

