---
chapter: Eleven
ctitle: God’s Plan for Salvation
title: Reality and Redemption
ref: Tx.11.IX
---

<sup>77</sup> Do you *really* believe that you can kill the Son of God? The Father
has hidden His Son safely within Himself and kept him far away from your
destructive thoughts, but *you* know neither the Father nor the Son
because of them. You attack the real world every day and every hour and
every minute, and yet you are surprised that you cannot see it. If you
seek love in order to attack it, you will *never* find it. For if love
is sharing, how can you find it except through *itself*? Offer it and it
will come to you because it is drawn to itself. But offer attack and it
will remain hidden, for it can live only in peace.

<sup>78</sup> God's Son is as safe as his Father, for the Son knows his Father's
protection and *cannot* fear. His Father's love holds him in perfect
peace, and needing nothing, he *asks* for nothing. Yet he is far from
you whose Self he is, for you chose to attack him, and he disappeared
from your sight into his Father. *He* did not change, but *you* did. For
a split mind and all its works were not created by the Father and could
not live in the knowledge of Him.

<sup>79</sup> When you made what is *not* true visible, what *is* true became
invisible. Yet it cannot be invisible in *itself*, for the Holy Spirit
sees it with perfect clarity. It is invisible to you because you are
looking at something *else*. Yet it is no more up to you to decide what
is visible and what is invisible than it is up to you to decide what
reality is. What can be seen is what the *Holy Spirit* sees. The
definition of reality is God's, not yours. *He* created it, and *He*
knows what it is. You who knew have forgotten, and unless He had given
you a way to remember, you would have condemned yourselves to oblivion.

<sup>80</sup> Because of your Father's love you can *never* forget Him, for no one
can forget what God Himself placed in his memory. You can *deny* it, but
you cannot *lose* it. A Voice will answer every question you ask, and a
Vision will correct the perception of everything you see. For what you
have made invisible is the *only* truth, and what you have not heard is
the *only* answer. God would reunite you with yourself and did not
abandon you in your seeming distress. You are waiting only for Him and
do not know it. Yet His memory shines in your minds and cannot *be*
obliterated. It is no more past than future, being forever always.

<sup>81</sup> You have but to ask for this memory, and you *will* remember. Yet the
memory of God cannot shine in a mind which has *made* it invisible and
wants to *keep* it so. For the memory of God can dawn only in a mind
that wills to remember and that has relinquished the insane desire to
control reality. You who cannot even control yourselves should hardly
aspire to control the universe. But look upon what you have made of it
and rejoice that it is not so. Son of God, be not content with nothing!
What is not real cannot *be* seen and *has* no value. God could not
offer His Son what has no value, nor could His Son receive it. You were
redeemed the instant you thought you had deserted Him.

<sup>82</sup> Everything you made has never been and is invisible because the Holy
Spirit does not see it. Yet what He *does* see is yours to behold, and
through His vision your perception is healed. You have made the
invisible the only truth that this world holds. Valuing nothing, you
have sought nothing and *found* nothing. By making nothing *real* to
you, you have *seen* it. *But it is not there*. And Christ is invisible
to you because of what you have made visible to *yourselves*. Yet it
does not matter how much distance you have tried to interpose between
your awareness and truth. God's Son *can* be seen because his vision is
shared. The Holy Spirit looks upon him and sees nothing else in *you.*
What is invisible to you is perfect in His sight and encompasses *all*
of it. He has remembered you because He forgot not the Father.

<sup>83</sup> You looked upon the unreal and found despair. Yet by seeking the
unreal, what else *could* you find? The unreal world *is* a thing of
despair, for it can never be. And you who share God's Being with Him
could never be content without reality. What God did not give you has no
power over you, and the attraction of love for love remains
irresistible. For it is the function of love to unite all things unto
itself, and to hold all things together by extending its wholeness.

<sup>84</sup> The real world was given you by God in loving exchange for the world
*you* made and which *you* see. But take it from the hand of Christ and
look upon it. Its reality will make everything else invisible, for
beholding it is *total* perception. And as you look upon it, you will
remember that it was always so. Nothingness will become invisible, for
you will at last have seen truly. Redeemed perception is easily
translated into knowledge, for *only* perception is capable of error,
and perception has never been. Being corrected, it gives place to
knowledge, which is forever the *only* reality. The Atonement is but the
way back to what was never lost. Your Father could not cease to love His
Son.

