---
chapter: Eleven
ctitle: God’s Plan for Salvation
title: Guiltlessness and Invulnerability
ref: Tx.11.X
---

<sup>85</sup> If you did not feel guilty, you *could* not attack, for condemnation
is the root of attack. It is the judgment of one mind by another as
*unworthy* of love and *deserving* of punishment. But herein lies the
split. For the mind that judges perceives itself as *separate* from the
mind being judged, believing that by punishing another, *it* will escape
punishment. All this is but the delusional attempt of the mind to deny
itself and *escape the penalty of denial*. It is not an attempt to
*relinquish* denial but to *hold on* to it. For it is guilt that has
obscured the Father to you, and it is guilt that has driven you insane.

<sup>86</sup> The acceptance of guilt into the Mind of God's Son was the beginning
of the separation, as the acceptance of the Atonement is its end. The
world you see is the delusional system of those made mad by guilt. Look
carefully at this world, and you will realize that this is so. For this
world is the symbol of punishment, and all the laws which seem to govern
it are the laws of death. Children are born into it through pain and in
pain. Their growth is attended by suffering, and they learn of sorrow
and separation and death. Their minds are trapped in their brain, and
its powers decline if their bodies are hurt. They seem to love, yet they
desert and are deserted. They appear to lose what they love, perhaps the
most insane belief of all. And their bodies wither and gasp and are laid
in the ground and seem to be no more. Not one of them but has thought
that God is cruel.

<sup>87</sup> If this *were* the real world, God *would* be cruel. For no father
could subject his children to this as the price of salvation and *be*
loving. *Love does not kill to save*. If it did, attack *would* be
salvation, and this is the *ego's* interpretation, *not* God's. Only the
world of guilt could demand this, for only the guilty could *conceive*
of it. Adam's “sin” could have touched none of you, had you not believed
that it was the *Father* Who drove him out of paradise. For in that
belief, the knowledge of the Father was lost, since only those who do
*not* understand Him *could* believe it.

<sup>88</sup> This world *is* a picture of the crucifixion of God's Son. And until
you realize that God's Son cannot *be* crucified, this is the world you
will see. Yet you will not realize this until you accept the eternal
fact that God's Son is *not guilty.* He *deserves* only love because he
has *given* only love. He cannot *be* condemned because he has never
condemned. The Atonement is the final lesson he need learn, for it
teaches him that, never having sinned, he has no *need* of salvation.

<sup>89</sup> Long ago we said that the Holy Spirit shares the goal of all good
teachers, whose ultimate aim is to make themselves unnecessary by
teaching their pupils all they know. The Holy Spirit wills *only* this,
for sharing the Father's love for His Son, He wills to remove *all*
guilt from his mind that he may remember his Father in peace. For peace
and guilt are antithetical, and the Father can be remembered *only* in
peace. Love and guilt cannot coexist, and to accept one is to *deny* the
other. Guilt hides Christ from your sight, for it is the denial of the
blamelessness of God's Son.

<sup>90</sup> In this strange world which you have made, the Son of God *has*
sinned. How could you *see* him, then? By making him invisible, the
world of retribution rose in the black cloud of guilt which you
accepted, and you hold it dear. For the blamelessness of Christ is the
proof that the ego never was and can never be. Without guilt the ego
*has* no life, and God's Son *is* without guilt. As you look upon
yourselves and judge what you do honestly, as you have been asked to do,
you may be tempted to wonder how you *can* be guiltless.

<sup>91</sup> Yet consider this: You are not guiltless in time, but in *eternity.*
You *have* “sinned” in the past, but there *is* no past. Always has *no*
direction. Time seems to go in one direction, but when you reach its
end, it will roll up like a long carpet which has spread along the past
behind you and will disappear. As long as you believe the Son of God is
guilty, you will walk along this carpet, believing that it leads to
death. And the journey will seem long and cruel and senseless, for so it
*is.*

<sup>92</sup> The journey which the Son of God has set himself is foolish indeed,
but the journey on which his Father sets him is one of release and joy.
The Father is *not* cruel, and His Son *cannot* hurt himself. The
retaliation he fears and which he *sees* will never touch him, for
although he believes in it, the Holy Spirit *knows* it is not true. The
Holy Spirit stands at the *end* of time, where *you* must be because He
is *with* you. He has *always* undone everything unworthy of the Son of
God, for such was His mission, given Him by God. And what God gives has
*always* been.

<sup>93</sup> You will see me as you learn the Son of God is guiltless. He has
always sought his guiltlessness, and he has *found* it. For everyone is
seeking to escape from the prison he has made, and the way to find
release is not denied him. Being *in* him, he *has* found it. *When* he
finds it is only a matter of time, and time is but an illusion. For the
Son of God is guiltless *now*, and the brightness of his purity shines
untouched forever in God's Mind. God's Son will *always* be as he was
created. Deny *your* world and judge him not, for his eternal
guiltlessness is in the mind of his Father, and protects him forever.

<sup>94</sup> When you have accepted the Atonement for yourselves, you will realize
that there *is* no guilt in God's Son. And *only* as you look upon him
as guiltless can you understand his oneness. For the idea of guilt
brings a belief in condemnation of one by another, projecting separation
in place of unity. You can condemn only *yourself*, and by so doing, you
cannot know that you *are* God's Son. You have denied the condition of
his Being, which is his perfect blamelessness. Out of love he was
created, and in love he abides. Goodness and mercy have always followed
him, for he has always extended the love of his Father.

<sup>95</sup> As you perceive the holy companions who travel with you, you will
realize that there *is* no journey, but only an awakening. The Son of
God, who sleepeth not, has kept faith with his Father *for* you. There
is no road to travel on and no time to travel through. For God waits not
for His Son in time, being forever unwilling to be without him. And so
it has always been. Let the holiness of God's Son shine away the cloud
of guilt that darkens your mind, and by accepting his purity as yours,
learn of him that it *is* yours.

<sup>96</sup> You are invulnerable *because* you are guiltless. You can hold on to
the past *only* through guilt. For guilt establishes that you will be
punished for what you have done and thus depends on one-dimensional
time, proceeding from past to future. No one who believes this can
understand what *always* means. And therefore guilt *must* deprive you
of the appreciation of eternity. You are immortal *because* you are
eternal and always *must* be now. Guilt, then, is a way of holding past
and future in your minds to ensure the ego's continuity. For if what has
been *will* be punished, the ego's continuity is guaranteed. Yet the
guarantee of your continuity is God's, not the ego's. And immortality is
the opposite of time, for time passes away, while immortality is
constant.

<sup>97</sup> Accepting the Atonement teaches you what immortality *is*, for by
accepting your guiltlessness, you learn that the past has never been,
and so the future is needless. The future, in time, is always associated
with expiation, and *only* guilt could induce a sense of *need* for
expiation. Accepting the guiltlessness of the Son of God as *yours* is
therefore God's way of reminding you of His Son and what he is in truth.
For God has never condemned His Son, and being guiltless, he *is*
eternal.

<sup>98</sup> You cannot dispel guilt by making it real and *then* atoning for it.
This is the ego's plan, which it offers *instead* of dispelling it. The
ego believes in atonement through *attack*, being fully committed to the
insane notion that attack *is* salvation. And you who cherish guilt must
*also* believe it, for how else but by identifying *with* the ego could
you hold dear what you do not want?

<sup>99</sup> The ego teaches you to attack yourself *because* you are guilty, and
this must *increase* the guilt, for guilt is the *result* of attack. In
the ego's teaching, then, there *is* no escape from guilt. For attack
makes guilt real, and if it is real, there *is* no way to overcome it.
The Holy Spirit dispels it simply through the calm recognition that it
has never been. As He looks upon the guiltless Son of God, he *knows*
this is true. And being true for *you*, you *cannot* attack yourself,
for without guilt, attack is impossible. You, then, *are* saved because
God's Son is guiltless. And being wholly pure, you *are* invulnerable.

