---
chapter: Eleven
ctitle: God’s Plan for Salvation
title: Seeking and Finding
ref: Tx.11.V
---

<sup>36</sup> The ego is certain that love is dangerous, and this is always its
central teaching. It never *puts* it this way; on the contrary, everyone
who believes that the ego is salvation is intensely engaged in the
search for love. Yet the ego, though encouraging the search very
actively, makes one proviso—do not *find* it. Its dictates, then, can be
summed up simply as, “Seek and do *not* find.” This is the one promise
the ego holds out to you and the one promise it will *keep*. For the ego
pursues its goal with fanatic insistence, and its reality testing,
though severely impaired, is completely consistent.

<sup>37</sup> The search which the ego undertakes is therefore bound to be
defeated. And since it also teaches that it is *your* identification,
its guidance leads you to a journey which must end in perceived
*self*\-defeat. For the ego *cannot* love, and in its frantic search for
love, it is seeking what it is *afraid* to find. The search is
inevitable because the ego is part of your mind, and because of its
source, the ego is not wholly split off, or it could not be believed at
all. For it is *your* mind that believes in it and gives existence to
it. Yet it is also your mind that has the power to *deny* the ego's
existence, and you will surely do so when you realize exactly what the
journey is on which the ego sets you.

<sup>38</sup> It is surely obvious that no one wants to find what would *utterly*
defeat him. Being unable to love, the ego would be totally inadequate in
love's presence, for it could not respond at all. You would *have* to
abandon the ego's guidance, for it would be quite apparent that it had
not taught you the response pattern you *need.* The ego will therefore
*distort* love and teach you that love calls forth the responses which
the ego *can* teach. Follow its teaching, then, and you will *search*
for love but will not *recognize* it.

<sup>39</sup> Do you realize that the ego must set you on a journey which cannot
*but* lead to a sense of futility and depression? To seek and *not* to
find is hardly joyous. Is this the promise *you* would keep? The Holy
Spirit offers you another promise, and one that will lead to joy. For
*His* promise is always, “Seek and you will *find*,” and under His
guidance you cannot *be* defeated. His is the journey to
*accomplishment*, and the goal He sets before you He will *give* you.
For He will never deceive God's Son, whom He loves with the love of the
Father.

<sup>40</sup> You *will* undertake a journey because you are *not* at home in this
world. And you *will* search for your home whether you know where it is
or not. If you believe it is outside yourself, the search will be
futile, for you will be seeking it where it is not. You do not know how
to look within yourself, for you do not *believe* your home is there.
Yet the Holy Spirit knows it *for* you, and He will guide you *to* your
home because that is His mission. As He fulfills *His* mission, He will
teach you *yours*, for your mission is the same as His. By guiding your
*brothers* home, you are but following Him.

<sup>41</sup> Behold the Guide your Father gave you that you might learn you have
eternal life. For death is not your Father's Will nor yours, and
whatever is true *is* the Will of the Father. You pay no price for life,
for that was given you, but you *do* pay a price for death, and a very
heavy one. If death is your treasure, you will sell everything else to
purchase it. And you will believe that you *have* purchased it *because*
you have sold everything else. Yet you *cannot* sell the Kingdom of
Heaven. Your inheritance can neither be bought *nor* sold. There can
*be* no disinherited parts of the Sonship, for God is whole, and all His
extensions are like Him.

<sup>42</sup> The Atonement was not the price of our wholeness, but it *was* the
price of your *awareness* of your wholeness. For what you chose to
“sell” had to be kept for you since you could not “buy” it back. Yet
*you* must invest in it, not with money but *with your spirit*. For
Spirit is will, and will *is* the “price” of the Kingdom. Your
inheritance awaits only the recognition that you have *been* redeemed.
The Holy Spirit guides you into life eternal, but *you* must relinquish
your investment in death, or you will not *see* life though it is all
around you.

