---
chapter: Eleven
ctitle: God’s Plan for Salvation
title: The Judgement of the Holy Spirit
ref: Tx.11.II
---

<sup>3</sup> There is but one interpretation of all motivation that makes any
sense. And because it is the Holy Spirit's judgment, it requires no
effort at all on your part. Every loving thought is true. Everything
else is an appeal for healing and help. That is what it is, regardless
of the form it takes. Can anyone be justified in responding with anger
to a plea for help? No response can be appropriate except the
willingness to give it to him, for this and *only* this is what he is
asking for. Offer him anything else, and you are assuming the right to
attack his reality by interpreting it as *you* see fit.

<sup>4</sup> Perhaps the danger of this to your own mind is not yet fully apparent
to you, but this by no means signifies that it is not perfectly clear.
If you maintain that an appeal for help is something else, you will
*react* to something else, and your response will be inappropriate to
reality as *it* is but *not* to your perception of it. This is poor
reality testing by definition. There is nothing to prevent you from
recognizing *all* calls for help as exactly what they are except your
own perceived *need* to attack. It is only *this* that makes you willing
to engage in endless “battles” with reality in which you *deny* the
reality of the need for healing by making it unreal. You would not do
this except for your *unwillingness* to perceive reality, which you
withhold from *yourself*.

<sup>5</sup> It is surely good advice to tell you not to judge what you do not
understand. No one with a personal investment is a reliable witness, for
truth to him has become what he *wants* it to be. If you are unwilling
to perceive an appeal for help as what it *is*, it is because you are
unwilling to *give* help *and to receive it*. The analysis of the ego's
“real” motivation is the modern equivalent of the inquisition, for in
both a brother's errors are “uncovered” and he is then attacked *for his
own good*. What can this be *but* projection? For *his* errors lay in
the minds of his interpreters, for which they punished *him*.

<sup>6</sup> Whenever you fail to recognize a call for help, you are *refusing*
help. Would you maintain that you do not *need* it? Yet this *is* what
you are maintaining when you refuse to recognize a brother's appeal, for
only by *answering* his appeal can *you* be helped. Deny him your help,
and you will not perceive God's answer to *you*. The Holy Spirit does
not need your help in interpreting motivation, but you *do* need *His.*
Only *appreciation* is an appropriate response to your brother.
Gratitude is due him for both his loving thoughts and his appeals for
help, for both are capable of bringing love into *your* awareness if you
perceive them truly. And *all* your sense of strain comes from your
attempts *not* to do just this.

<sup>7</sup> How simple, then, is God's plan for salvation. There is but *one*
response to reality, for reality evokes no conflict at all. There is but
*one* Teacher of reality, Who understands what it *is.* He does not
change His Mind about reality because *reality* does not change.
Although *your* interpretations of reality are meaningless in your
divided state, His remain consistently true. He *gives* them to you
because they are *for* you. Do not attempt to “help” a brother in *your*
way, for you cannot help yourselves. But hear his call for the help of
God, and you will recognize your *own* need for the Father.

<sup>8</sup> Your interpretations of your brother's need is your interpretation of
*yours*. By *giving* help you are *asking* for it, and if you perceive
but one need in yourself, you *will* be healed. For you will recognize
God's answer as you want it to be, and if you want it in truth, it will
be truly yours. Every appeal you answer in the name of Christ brings the
remembrance of your Father closer to *your* awareness. For the sake of
*your* need, then, hear every call for help as what it is, so God can
answer *you*.

<sup>9</sup> By applying the Holy Spirit's interpretation of the reactions of
others more and more consistently, you will gain an increasing awareness
that *His* criteria are equally applicable to *you*. For to *recognize*
fear is not enough to escape from it, although the recognition is
necessary to demonstrate the need for escape. The Holy Spirit must still
*translate* it into truth. If you were *left* with the fear, having
recognized it, you would have taken a step *away* from reality, not
*towards* it. Yet we have repeatedly emphasized the need to recognize
fear and face it *without* disguise as a crucial step in the undoing of
the ego. Consider how well the Holy Spirit's interpretation of the
motives of others will serve you then.

<sup>10</sup> Having taught you to accept only loving thoughts in others and to
regard everything else as an appeal for help, He has taught you that
*fear* is an appeal for help. This is what recognizing it *really*
means. If you do not *protect* it, *He* will reinterpret it. That is the
ultimate value *to you* in learning to perceive attack as a call for
love. We have learned surely that fear and attack are inevitably
associated. If *only* attack produces fear and if you see attack as the
call for help that it *is*, the unreality of fear *must* dawn upon you.
For fear *is* a call for love in unconscious recognition of what has
been denied.

