---
chapter: Eleven
ctitle: God’s Plan for Salvation
title: The Investment in Reality
ref: Tx.11.IV
---

<sup>24</sup> I once asked if you were willing to sell all you have and give to the
poor and follow me. This is what I meant: If you had no investment in
anything in this world, you could teach the poor where their treasure
*is.* The poor are merely those who have invested wrongly, and they are
poor indeed! Because they are in need, it is given you to help them
since *you* are among them. Consider how perfectly your lesson would be
learned if you were unwilling to *share* their poverty. For poverty is
lack, and there is but *one* lack since there is but *one* need.

<sup>25</sup> Suppose a brother insists on having you do something you think you do
not want to do. The very fact of his insistence should tell you that he
believes salvation lies in it. If you insist on refusing and experience
a quick response of opposition, you are believing that *your* salvation
lies in *not* doing it. You, then, are making the same mistake that he
is and are making his error real to *both* of you. Insistence means
investment, and what you invest in is *always* related to your notion of
salvation. The question is always two-fold—first, *what* is to be saved,
and second, *how* can it be saved?

<sup>26</sup> Whenever you become angry with a brother, for *whatever* reason, you
are believing that the *ego* is to be saved and to be saved by *attack*.
If *he* attacks, you are agreeing with this belief, and if *you* attack,
you are reinforcing it. *Remember that those who attack are poor*. Their
poverty asks for gifts, *not* for further impoverishment. You who could
help them are surely acting destructively if you accept their poverty as
*yours.* If you had not invested as *they* had, it would never occur to
you to overlook their need.

<sup>27</sup> Recognize *what does not matter*, and if your brothers ask you for
something “outrageous,” do it *because* it does not matter. Refuse and
your opposition establishes that it *does* matter to you. It is only
*you*, therefore, who have made the request outrageous, for nothing can
*be* asked of you, and every request of a brother is for *you.* Why
would you insist in *denying* him? For to do so is to deny yourself and
impoverish both. *He* is asking for salvation, as *you* are. Poverty is
of the ego and *never* of God. No “outrageous” request can be made of
one who recognizes what is valuable and wants to accept nothing else.

<sup>28</sup> Salvation is for the mind, and it is attained through peace. This is
the *only* thing that can be saved and the *only* way to save it. Any
response *other* than love arises from a confusion about the “what” and
the “how” of salvation, and this is the *only* answer. Never lose sight
of this, and never allow yourself to believe even for an instant that
there *is* another answer. For you will surely place yourself among the
poor, who do not understand that they dwell in abundance and that
salvation is come.

<sup>29</sup> To identify with the ego is to attack yourself and *make* yourself
poor. That is why everyone who identifies with the ego feels deprived.
What he *experiences* then is depression or anger, but what he *did* is
to exchange his self-love for self-hate, making him *afraid* of himself.
He does *not* realize this. Even if he is fully aware of anxiety, he
does not perceive its source as his own *ego identification*, and he
*always* tries to handle it by making some sort of insane “arrangement”
with the world. He always perceives this world as *outside* himself, for
this is crucial to his adjustment. He does not realize that he *makes*
this world, for there *is* no world outside of him.

<sup>30</sup> If only the loving thoughts of God's Son are the world's reality, the
real world *must* be in his mind. His insane thoughts, too, must be in
his mind, but an internal conflict of this magnitude he cannot tolerate.
A split mind *is* endangered, and the recognition that it encompasses
completely opposed thoughts within itself *is* intolerable. Therefore
the mind projects the split, *not* the reality. Everything you perceive
as the outside world is merely your attempt to maintain your ego
identification, for everyone believes that identification is salvation.
Yet consider what has happened, for thoughts *do* have consequences to
the thinker.

<sup>31</sup> You are *at odds* with the world as you perceive it because you think
*it* is antagonistic to *you*. This is a necessary consequence of what
you have done. You have projected outward what *is* antagonistic to what
is inward, and therefore you would *have* to perceive it this way. That
is why you must realize that your hatred is *in* your mind and *not*
outside it before you can get rid of it and why you must get rid of it
*before* you can perceive the world as it really is.

<sup>32</sup> We once said that God so loved the world that He gave it to His
only-begotten Son. God *does* love the real world, and those who
perceive *its* reality cannot *see* the world of death. For death is
*not* of the real world, in which everything is eternal. God gave you
the real world in exchange for the one you made out of your split mind,
and which *is* the symbol of death. For if you could *really* separate
yourselves from the Mind of God, you *would* die, and the world you
perceive *is* a world of separation.

<sup>33</sup> You were willing to accept even death to deny your Father. Yet He
would not have it so, and so it is *not* so. You still could not will
against Him, and that is why you have no control over the world you
made. It is not a world of will because it is governed by the desire to
be unlike Him, and this desire is *not* will. The world you made is
therefore totally chaotic, governed by arbitrary and senseless “laws,”
and without meaning of *any* kind. For it was made out of what you do
*not* want, projected from your mind because you were afraid of it.

<sup>34</sup> Yet this world is *only* in the mind of its maker along with his
*real* salvation. Do not believe it is outside of yourself, for only by
recognizing *where* it is will you gain control over it. For you *do*
have control over your mind since the mind is the mechanism of decision.
If you will recognize that *all* attack which you perceive is in your
own mind *and nowhere else*, you will at last have placed its source,
and where it began it must end. For in this same place also lies
salvation. The altar of God where Christ abideth is there.

<sup>35</sup> You have defiled the altar but *not* the world. Yet Christ has placed
the Atonement on the altar *for* you. Bring your perceptions of the
world to this altar, for it is the altar to truth. There you will see
your vision changed, and there you will learn to see truly. From this
place, where God and His Son dwell in peace and where you are welcome,
you will look out in peace and behold the world truly. Yet to find the
place, you must relinquish your investment in the world as *you* have
projected it, allowing the Holy Spirit to project the real world to you
from the altar of God.

