---
chapter: Eleven
ctitle: God’s Plan for Salvation
title: The Vision of Christ
ref: Tx.11.VII
---

<sup>53</sup> The ego is trying to teach you how to gain the whole world and lose
your own Soul. The Holy Spirit teaches that you *cannot* lose your Soul
and there *is* no gain in the world, for *of itself* it profits nothing.
To invest in something without profit is surely to impoverish yourself,
and the overhead is high. Not only is there no profit in the investment,
but the cost to *you* is enormous. For this investment costs you the
world's reality by denying *yours* and gives you nothing in return. You
*cannot* sell your Soul, but you *can* sell your *awareness* of it. You
cannot perceive your Soul, but you will not *know* it while you perceive
anything *else* as more valuable.

<sup>54</sup> The Holy Spirit is your strength because He perceives nothing *but*
your Soul as you. He is perfectly aware that you do *not* know
yourselves and perfectly aware of how to teach you what you are.
*Because* He loves you, He will gladly teach you what He loves, for He
wills to share it. Remembering you always, He cannot let you forget your
worth. For the Father never ceases to remind Him of His Son, and He
never ceases to remind His Son of the Father. God is in your memory
*because* of Him. You chose to forget your Father, but you did not
*will* to do so, and therefore you can decide otherwise. As it was *my*
decision, so is it *yours*.

<sup>55</sup> You do not *want* the world. The only thing of value in it is
whatever part of it you look upon with love. This gives it the only
reality it will ever have. Its value is *not* in itself, but yours *is*
in you. As self-value comes from self-*extension*, so does the
*perception* of self-value come from the projection of loving thoughts
outward. Make the world real unto *yourself*, for the real world is the
gift of the Holy Spirit, and so it *belongs* to you.

<sup>56</sup> Correction is for all who cannot see. To open the eyes of the blind
is the Holy Spirit's mission, for He knows that they have not lost their
vision but merely sleep. He would awaken them from the sleep of
forgetting to the remembering of God. Christ's eyes are open, and He
will look upon whatever you see with love if you accept His vision as
yours.

<sup>57</sup> The Holy Spirit keeps the vision of Christ for every Son of God who
sleeps. In His sight the Son of God is perfect, and He longs to share
His vision with you. He will show you the real world because God gave
you Heaven. Through Him your Father calls His Son to remember. The
awakening of His Son begins with his investment in the *real* world, and
by this he will learn to reinvest in *himself*. For reality is one with
the Father *and* the Son, and the Holy Spirit blesses the real world in
Their Name.

<sup>58</sup> When you have seen this real world, as you will surely do, you *will*
remember us. Yet you must learn the cost of sleeping and *refuse* to pay
it. Only then will you decide to awaken. And then the real world will
spring to your sight, for Christ has never slept. He is waiting to be
seen, for He has never lost sight of *you*. He looks quietly on the real
world, which He would share with you because He knows of the Father's
love for Him. And knowing this, He would give you what is yours. In
perfect peace He waits for you at His Father's altar, holding out the
Father's love to you in the quiet light of the Holy Spirit's blessing.
For the Holy Spirit will lead everyone home to his Father, where Christ
waits as his Self.

<sup>59</sup> Every Child of God is one in Christ, for his Being is in Christ as
Christ's is in God. Christ's love for you is His love for His Father,
which He knows because He knows His Father's love for Him. When the Holy
Spirit has at last led you to Christ at the altar to His Father,
perception fuses into knowledge because perception has become so holy
that its transfer to holiness is merely its natural extension. Love
transfers to love without any interference, for the situations are
identical. \[Only the *ability* to make this transfer is the product of
learning.\] As you perceive more and more common elements in *all*
situations, the transfer of your training under the Holy Spirit's
guidance increases and becomes generalized. Gradually you learn to apply
it to everyone and everything, for its applicability *is* universal.
When this has been accomplished, perception and knowledge have become so
similar that they share the unification of the laws of God.

<sup>60</sup> What is one cannot be perceived as separate, and the denial of the
separation *is* the reinstatement of knowledge. At the altar of God, the
holy perception of God's Son becomes so enlightened that light streams
into it, and the Spirit of God's Son shines in the Mind of the Father
and becomes one with it. Very gently does God shine upon Himself, loving
the extension of Himself which is His Son. The world has no purpose as
it blends into the purpose of God. For the real world has slipped
quietly into Heaven, where everything eternal in it has always been.
There the Redeemer and the redeemed join in perfect love of God and of
each other. Heaven is your home, and being in God, it must *also* be in
you.

