---
chapter: Twenty Six
ctitle: The Transition
title: The “Sacrifice” of Oneness
ref: Tx.26.II
---

<sup>2</sup> The world you see is based on “sacrifice” of oneness. It is a picture
of a complete disunity and total lack of joining. Around each entity is
built a wall so seeming solid that it looks as if what is inside can
never reach without, and what is out can never reach and join with what
is locked away within the wall. Each part must sacrifice the other part
to keep itself complete. For if they joined, each one would lose its own
identity, and by their separation are their selves maintained.

<sup>3</sup> The little that the body fences off *becomes* the self, preserved
through sacrifice of all the rest. And all the rest must *lose* this
little part, remaining incomplete to keep its own identity intact. In
this perception of yourself, the body's loss would be a sacrifice
indeed. For sight of bodies becomes the sign that sacrifice is limited
and something still remains for you alone. And for this little to belong
to you are limits placed on everything outside, just as they are on
everything you think is yours. For giving and receiving *are* the same.
And to accept the limits of a body is to impose these limits on each
brother whom you see. For you must see him as you see yourself.

<sup>4</sup> The body *is* a loss and *can* be made to sacrifice. And while you see
your brother as a body, apart from you and separate in his cell, you are
demanding sacrifice of him *and* you. What greater sacrifice could be
demanded than that God's Son perceive himself without his Father? And
his Father be without His Son? Yet every sacrifice demands that they be
separate and without the other. The memory of God *must* be denied if
any sacrifice is asked of anyone. What witness to the wholeness of God's
Son is seen within a world of separate bodies, however much he witnesses
to truth? He is *invisible* in such a world. Nor can his song of union
and of love be heard at all. Yet is it given him to make the world
recede before his song and sight of him replace the body's eyes.

<sup>5</sup> Those who would see the witnesses to truth instead of to illusion
merely ask that they might see a purpose in the world that gives it
sense and makes it meaningful. Without your special function *has* this
world no meaning for you. Yet it can become a treasure house as rich and
limitless as Heaven itself. No instant passes here in which your
brother's holiness cannot be seen, to add a limitless supply to every
meager scrap and tiny crumb of happiness that you allot yourself.

<sup>6</sup> You *can* lose sight of oneness, but can *not* make sacrifice of its
reality. Nor can you *lose* what you would sacrifice nor keep the Holy
Spirit from His task of showing you that it has not been lost. Hear then
the song your brother sings to you. And let the world recede and take
the rest his witness offers on behalf of peace. But judge him not, for
you will hear no song of liberation for yourself nor see what it is
given him to witness to that you may see it and rejoice with him. Make
not his holiness a sacrifice to your belief in sin. You sacrifice *your*
innocence with his and die each time you see in him a sin deserving
death.

<sup>7</sup> Yet every instant can you be reborn and given life again. His holiness
gives life to you, who cannot die because his sinlessness is known to
God and can no more be sacrificed by you than can the light in you be
blotted out because he sees it not. You who would make a sacrifice of
life and make your eyes and ears bear witness to the death of God and of
His holy Son, think not that you have power to make of them what God
willed not they be. In Heaven God's Son is not imprisoned in a body nor
is sacrificed in solitude to sin.

<sup>8</sup> And as he is in Heaven, so must he be eternally and everywhere. He is
the same forever—born again each instant, untouched by time, and far
beyond the reach of any sacrifice of life or death. For neither did he
make, and only one was given him by One Who knows His gifts can never
suffer sacrifice and loss. God's justice rests in gentleness upon His
Son and keeps him safe from all injustices the world would lay upon him.
Could it be that *you* could make his sins reality and sacrifice his
Father's Will for him?

<sup>9</sup> Condemn him not by seeing him within the rotting prison where he sees
himself. It is your special function to ensure the door be opened that
he may come forth to shine on you and give you back the gift of freedom
by receiving it of you. What is the Holy Spirit's special function but
to release the holy Son of God from the imprisonment he made to *keep*
himself from justice? Could your function be a task apart and separate
from His Own?

