---
chapter: Twenty Six
ctitle: The Transition
title: The Forms of Error
ref: Tx.26.III
---

<sup>10</sup> It is not difficult to understand the reasons why you do not ask the
Holy Spirit to solve *all* problems for you. He has not greater
difficulty in resolving some than others. Every problem is the same to
Him, because each one is solved in just the *same* respect and through
the *same* approach. The aspects which need solving do not change,
whatever form the problem seems to take. A problem can appear in many
forms, and it will do so while the problem lasts. It serves no purpose
to attempt to solve it in a special form. It will recur and then recur
again and yet again until it has been answered for all time and will not
rise again in any form. And only then are you released from it.

<sup>11</sup> The Holy Spirit offers you release from *every* problem that you
think you have. They are the same to Him because each one, regardless of
the form it seems to take, is a demand that someone suffer loss and make
a sacrifice that you might gain. And when the situation is worked out so
no one loses, is the problem gone, because it was an error in perception
which now has been corrected. One mistake is not more difficult for Him
to bring to truth than is another. For there *is* but one mistake—the
whole idea that loss is possible and could result in gain for anyone. If
this were true, then God would be unfair, sin would be possible, attack
be justified, and vengeance fair.

<sup>12</sup> This one mistake in any form has *one* correction. There *is* no
loss; to think there is, is a mistake. You *have* no problems, though
you think you have. And yet you could not think so if you saw them
vanish one by one without regard to size, complexity, or place and time,
or any attribute which you perceive that makes each one seem different
from the rest. Think not the limits you impose on what you see can limit
God in any way.

<sup>13</sup> The miracle of justice can correct *all* errors. Every problem *is*
an error. It does injustice to the Son of God and therefore is not true.
The Holy Spirit does not evaluate injustices as great or small or more
or less. They have no properties to Him. They are mistakes from which
the Son of God is suffering, but needlessly. And so He takes the thorns
and nails away. He does not pause to judge whether the hurt be large or
little. He makes but one judgment—that to hurt God's Son *must* be
unfair and therefore is not so.

<sup>14</sup> You who believe it safe to give but some mistakes to be corrected
while you keep the others to yourself, remember this: justice is total.
There is no such thing as partial justice. If the Son of God is guilty,
then is he condemned, and he deserves no mercy from the God of justice.
But ask not God to punish him because *you* find him guilty and would
have him die. God offers you the means to see his innocence. Would it be
fair to punish him because you will not look at what is there to see?
Each time you keep a problem for yourself to solve or judge that it is
one which has no resolution, you have made it great and past the hope of
healing. You deny the miracle of justice *can* be fair.

<sup>15</sup> If God is just, then can there be no problems that justice cannot
solve. But you believe that some injustices are fair and good and
necessary to preserve yourself. It is these problems that you think are
great and cannot be resolved. For there are those you *want* to suffer
loss and no one whom you wish to be preserved from sacrifice entirely.
Consider once again your special function. *One* is given you to see in
him his perfect sinlessness. And you will ask no sacrifice of him
because you could not will he suffer loss. The miracle of justice you
call forth will rest on you as surely as on him. Nor will the Holy
Spirit be content until it is received by everyone. For what you give to
Him *is* everyone's, and by your giving it can He ensure that everyone
receives it equally.

<sup>16</sup> Think then how great your own release will be when you are willing to
receive correction for all your problems. You will not keep one, for
pain in any form you will not want. And you will see each little hurt
resolved before the Holy Spirit's gentle sight. For all of them *are*
little in His sight and worth no more than just a tiny sigh before they
disappear, to be forever undone and unremembered. What seemed once to be
a special problem, a mistake without a remedy, or an affliction without
a cure has been transformed into a universal blessing. Sacrifice is
gone. And in its place the love of God can be remembered and will shine
away all memory of sacrifice and loss.

<sup>17</sup> God cannot be remembered until justice is loved instead of feared. He
cannot be unjust to anyone or anything because He knows that everything
that is belongs to Him and will forever be as He created it. Nothing He
loves but must be sinless and beyond attack. Your special function opens
wide the door beyond which is the memory of His love kept perfectly
intact and undefiled. And all you need to do is but to wish that Heaven
be given you instead of hell, and every bolt and barrier that seems to
hold the door securely barred and locked will merely fall away and
disappear. For it is not your Father's Will that you should offer or
receive less than He gave when He created you in perfect love.

