---
chapter: Twenty Six
ctitle: The Transition
title: The Remaining Task
ref: Tx.26.XI
---

<sup>85</sup> What then remains to be undone for you to realize Their Presence?
Only this—you have a differential view of when attack is justified and
when you think it is unfair and not to be allowed. When you perceive it
as unfair, you think that a response of anger now is just. And thus you
see what is the same as different. Confusion is not limited. If it
occurs at all, it will be total. And its presence, in whatever form,
will hide Their Presence. They are known with clarity or not at all.
Confused perception will block knowledge. It is not a question of the
size of the confusion or how much it interferes. Its simple presence
shuts the door to Theirs and keeps Them there unknown.

<sup>86</sup> What does it mean if you perceive attack in certain forms to be
unfair to you? It means that there must be some forms in which you think
it *fair*. For otherwise, how could some be evaluated as unfair? Some
then are given meaning and perceived as sensible. And only some are seen
as meaningless. And this denies the fact that *all* are
senseless—equally without a cause or consequence and cannot have effects
of *any* kind. Their Presence is obscured by any veil which stands
between Their shining innocence and your awareness it is your own and
*equally* belongs to every living thing along with you. God limits not.
And what is limited can *not* be Heaven. So it *must* be hell.

<sup>87</sup> Unfairness and attack are *one* mistake, so firmly joined that where
one is perceived, the other must be seen. You cannot *be* unfairly
treated. The belief you are is but another form of the idea you are
deprived by someone not yourself. Projection of the cause of sacrifice
is at the root of everything perceived to be unfair and not your just
deserts. Yet it is *you* who ask this of yourself in deep injustice to
the Son of God. You have no enemy except yourself, and you are enemy
indeed to him because you do not know him *as* yourself. What could be
more unjust than that he be deprived of what he *is*, denied the right
to be himself, and asked to sacrifice his Father's love and yours as not
his due?

<sup>88</sup> Beware of the temptation to perceive yourself unfairly treated. In
this view, you seek to find an innocence which is not Theirs but yours
alone and at the cost of someone else's guilt. Can innocence be
purchased by the giving of your guilt to someone else? And *is* this
innocence which your attack on him attempts to get? Is it not
retribution for your own attack upon the Son of God you seek? Is it not
safer to believe that you are innocent of this and victimized despite
your innocence? Whatever way the game of guilt is played, there *must*
be loss. Someone must lose his innocence that someone else can take it
from him, making it his own.

<sup>89</sup> You think your brother is unfair to you because you think that one
must be unfair to make the other innocent. And in this game do you
perceive one purpose for your whole relationship. And this you seek to
add unto the purpose given it. The Holy Spirit's purpose is to let the
Presence of your holy Guests be known to you. And to this purpose,
nothing *can* be added, for the world is purposeless except for this. To
add or take away from this *one* goal is but to take away all purpose
from the world and from yourself. And each unfairness that the world
appears to lay upon you, *you* have laid on *it* by rendering it
purposeless, without the function that the Holy Spirit sees. And simple
justice has been thus denied to every living thing upon the earth.

<sup>90</sup> What this injustice does to you who judge unfairly and who see as you
have judged, you cannot calculate. The world grows dim and threatening,
and not a trace of all the happy sparkle that salvation brought can you
perceive to lighten up your way. And so you see yourself deprived of
light, abandoned to the dark, unfairly left without a purpose in a
futile world. The world is fair because the Holy Spirit has brought
injustice to the light within, and there has all unfairness been
resolved and been replaced with justice and with love. If you perceive
injustice anywhere, you need but say:

<sup>91</sup> *By this do I deny the Presence of the Father and the Son.<br/>
And I would rather know of Them than see injustice,<br/>
which Their Presence shines away.*

