---
chapter: Thirty One
ctitle: The Simplicity of Salvation
title: Recognizing the Spirit
ref: Tx.31.VI
---

<sup>62</sup> You see the flesh or recognize the Spirit. There is no compromise
between the two. If one is real the other must be false, for what is
real denies its opposite. There is no choice in vision but this one.
What you decide in this determines *all* you see and think is real and
hold as true. On this one choice does all your world depend, for here
have you established what you are, as flesh or Spirit in your own
belief. If you choose flesh, you never will escape the body as your own
reality, for you have chosen that you *want* it so. But choose the
Spirit, and all Heaven bends to touch your eyes and bless your holy
sight, that you may see the world of flesh no more except to heal and
comfort and to bless.

<sup>63</sup> Salvation is undoing. If you choose to see the body, you behold a
world of separation, unrelated things, and happenings that make no sense
at all. This one appears and disappears in death; that one is doomed to
suffering and loss. And no one is exactly as he was an instant previous,
nor will he be the same as he is now an instant hence. Who could have
trust where so much change is seen, for who is worthy if he be but dust?
Salvation is undoing of all this. And constancy arises in the sight of
those whose eyes salvation has released from looking at the cost of
keeping guilt because they chose to let it go instead.

<sup>64</sup> Salvation does not ask that you behold the Spirit and perceive the
body not. It merely asks that this should be your *choice*. For you can
see the body without help but do not understand how to behold a world
apart from it. It is your world salvation will undo and let you see
another world *your* eyes could never find. Be not concerned how this
could ever be. You do not understand how what you see arose to meet your
sight. For if you did, it would be gone. The veil of ignorance is drawn
across the evil and the good and must be passed that both may disappear,
so that perception finds no hiding place. How is this done? It is not
done at all. What could there be within the universe which God created
that must still be done?

<sup>65</sup> Only in arrogance could you conceive that *you* must make the way to
Heaven plain. The means are given you by which to see the world that
will replace the one you made. Your will be done! In Heaven as on earth,
this is forever true. It matters not where you believe you are nor what
you think the truth about yourself must really be. It makes no
difference what you look upon nor what you choose to feel or think or
wish. For God Himself has said, “Your will be done.” And it *is* done to
you accordingly.

<sup>66</sup> You who believe that you can choose to see the Son of God as you
would have him be, forget not that no concept of yourself will stand
against the truth of what you are. Undoing truth would be impossible.
But concepts are not difficult to change. *One* vision, clearly seen,
that does not fit the picture as it was perceived before will change the
world for eyes that learn to see, because the concept of the *self* has
changed. Are *you* invulnerable? Then the world is harmless in your
sight. Do *you* forgive? Then is the world forgiving, for you have
forgiven it its trespasses and so it looks on you with eyes that see as
yours. Are *you* a body? So is all the world perceived as treacherous
and out to kill.

<sup>67</sup> Are you a spirit, deathless and without the promise of corruption and
the stain of sin upon you? So the world is seen as stable, fully worthy
of your trust; a happy place to rest in for a while, where nothing need
be feared but only loved. Who is unwelcome to the kind in heart? And
what could hurt the truly innocent? Your will be done, you holy Child of
God. It does not matter if you think you are in earth or Heaven. What
your Father wills for you can never change. The truth in you remains as
radiant as a star, as pure as light, as innocent as Love Itself. And you
*are* worthy that your will be done!

