---
chapter: Thirty One
ctitle: The Simplicity of Salvation
title: The Illusion of an Enemy
ref: Tx.31.II
---

<sup>13</sup> An ancient lesson is not overcome by the opposing of the new and old.
It is not vanquished that the truth be known nor fought against to lose
to truth's appeal. There is no battle which must be prepared, no time to
be expended, and no plans that need be laid for bringing in the new.
There *is* an ancient battle being waged *against* the truth, but truth
does not respond. Who could be hurt in such a war unless he hurts
himself? He has no enemy in truth. And can he be assailed by dreams?

<sup>14</sup> Let us review again what seems to stand between you and the truth of
what you are. For there are steps in its relinquishment. The first is a
decision that *you* make. But afterwards the truth is *given* you. You
would *establish* truth. And by your wish, you set two choices to be
made each time you think you must decide on anything. Neither is true.
Nor are they different. Yet must we see them both before you can look
past them to the one alternative that *is* a different choice. But not
in dreams you made that this might be obscured to you.

<sup>15</sup> What *you* would choose between is not a choice and gives but the
illusion it is free, for it will have one outcome either way. Thus is it
really not a choice at all. The leader and the follower emerge as
separate roles, each seeming to possess advantages you would not want to
lose. So in their fusion there appears to be the hope of satisfaction
and of peace. You see yourself divided into both these roles, forever
split between the two. And every friend or enemy becomes a means to help
you save yourself from this.

<sup>16</sup> Perhaps you call it love. Perhaps you think that it is murder
justified at last. You hate the one you gave the leader's role when you
would have it, and you hate as well his not assuming it at times you
want to let the follower in you arise and give away the role of
leadership. And this is what you made your brother *for* and learned to
think that this his purpose *is*. Unless he serves it, he has not
fulfilled the function that was given him by you. And thus he merits
death because he has no purpose and no usefulness to you.

<sup>17</sup> And what of him? What does he want of you? What could he want, but
what you want of him? Herein is life as easily as death, for what you
choose, you choose as well for him. Two calls you make to him, as he to
you. Between *these* two *is* choice because from them there *is* a
different outcome. If he be the leader or the follower to you, it
matters not, for you have chosen death. But if he calls for death or
calls for life, for hate or for forgiveness and for help, is not the
same in outcome. Hear the one, and you are separate from him and are
lost. But hear the other, and you join with him, and in your answer is
salvation found. The voice you hear in him is but your own. What does he
ask you for? And listen well! For he is asking what will come to you
because you see an image of *yourself* and hear *your* voice requesting
what you *want.*

<sup>18</sup> Before you answer, pause to think of this:

<sup>19</sup> *The answer that I give my brother is what I am asking for. And what
I learn of him is what I learn about myself*.

<sup>20</sup> Then let us wait an instant and be still, forgetting everything we
thought we heard; remembering how much we do not know. This brother
neither leads nor follows us but walks beside us on the selfsame road.
He is like us, as near or far away from what we want as we will let him
be. We make no gains he does not make with us, and we fall back if he
does not advance.  Take not his hand in anger but in love, for in his
progress do you count your own. And we go separately along the way
unless you keep him safely by your side.

<sup>21</sup> Because he is your equal in God's love, you will be saved from all
appearances and answer to the Christ Who calls to you. Be still and
listen. Think not ancient thoughts. Forget the dismal lessons that you
learned about this Son of God who calls to you. Christ calls to all with
equal tenderness, seeing no leaders and no followers and hearing but one
answer to them all. Because He hears one Voice, He cannot hear a
different answer from the one He gave when God appointed Him His only
Son.

<sup>22</sup> Be very still an instant. Come without all thought of what you ever
learned before and put aside all images you made. The old will fall away
before the new without your opposition or intent. There will be no
attack upon the things you thought were precious and in need of care.
There will be no assault upon your wish to hear a call that never has
been made. Nothing will hurt you in this holy place to which you come to
listen silently and learn the truth of what you really want. No more
than this will you be asked to learn. But as you hear it, you will
understand you need but come away without the thoughts you did not want
and that were never true.

<sup>23</sup> Forgive your brother all appearances, which are but ancient lessons
that you taught yourself about the sinfulness in *you*. Hear but his
call for mercy and release from all the fearful images he holds of what
he is and of what you must be. He is afraid to walk with you and thinks
perhaps a bit behind, a bit ahead, would be a safer place for him to be.
Can *you* make progress if you think the same, advancing only when he
would step back and falling back when he would go ahead? For so do you
forget the journey's goal, which is but to decide to walk *with* him, so
neither leads nor follows. Thus it is a way you go *together*, not
alone. And in this choice is learning's outcome changed, for Christ has
been reborn to both of you.

<sup>24</sup> An instant spent without your old ideas of who your great companion
is and what he *should* be asking for will be enough to let this happen.
And you will perceive his purpose is the same as yours. He asks for what
*you* want and needs the same as *you*. It takes perhaps a different
form in him, but it is not the form you answer to. He asks and you
receive, for you have come with but one purpose—that you both may learn
you love each other with a brother's love. And as a brother, must his
Father be the same as yours, as he is like yourself.

<sup>25</sup> Together is your joint inheritance remembered and accepted by you
both. Alone it is denied to both of you. Is it not clear that while you
still insist on leading or on following, you think you walk alone with
no one by your side? This is the road to nowhere, for the light cannot
be given while you walk alone, and so you cannot see which way you go.
And thus there is confusion and a sense of endless doubting as you
stagger back and forward in the darkness and alone. Yet these are but
appearances of what the journey is and how it must be made. For next to
you is One Who holds the light before you so that every step is made in
certainty and sureness of the road. A blindfold can indeed obscure your
sight but cannot make the way itself grow dark. And He Who travels with
you *has* the light.

