---
chapter: Thirty One
ctitle: The Simplicity of Salvation
title: Self Concept versus Self
ref: Tx.31.V
---

<sup>43</sup> The learning of the world is built upon a concept of the self
adjusted to the world's reality. It fits it well. For this an image is
that suits a world of shadows and illusions. Here it walks at home,
where what it sees is one with it. The building of a concept of the self
is what the learning of the world is *for*. This is its purpose—that you
come without a self and make one as you go along. And by the time you
reach “maturity,” you have perfected it to meet the world on equal
terms, at one with its demands.

<sup>44</sup> A *concept* of the self is made by *you*. It bears no likeness to
yourself at all. It is an idol, made to take the place of your reality
as Son of God. The concept of the self the world would teach is not the
thing that it appears to be. For it is made to serve two purposes, but
one of which the mind can recognize. The first presents the face of
innocence, the aspect acted *on*. It is this face that smiles and charms
and even seems to love. It searches for companions, and it looks at
times with pity on the suffering and sometimes offers solace. It
believes that it is good within an evil world.

<sup>45</sup> This aspect can grow angry, for the world is wicked and unable to
provide the love and shelter innocence deserves. And so this face is
often wet with tears at the injustices the world accords to those who
would be generous and good. This aspect never makes the first attack.
But every day a hundred little things make small assaults upon its
innocence, provoking it to irritation and at last to open insult and
abuse.

<sup>46</sup> The face of innocence the concept of the self so proudly wears can
tolerate attack in self-defense, for is it not a well-known fact the
world deals harshly with defenseless innocence? No one who makes a
picture of himself omits this face, for he has need of it. The other
side he does not *want* to see. Yet it is here the learning of the world
has set its sights, for it is here the world's “reality” is set to see
to it the idol lasts.

<sup>47</sup> Beneath the face of innocence there is a lesson that the concept of
the self was made to teach. It is a lesson in a terrible displacement
and a fear so devastating that the face which smiles above it must
forever look away, lest it perceive the treachery it hides. The lesson
teaches this: “I am the thing you made of me, and as you look on me, you
stand condemned because of what I am.” On this conception of the self
the world smiles with approval, for it guarantees the pathways of the
world are safely kept and those who walk on them will not escape.

<sup>48</sup> Here is the central lesson that ensures your brother is condemned
eternally. For what you are has now become *his* sin. For this is no
forgiveness possible. No longer does it matter what he does, for your
accusing finger points to him, unwavering and deadly in its aim. It
points to you as well, but this is kept still deeper in the mists below
the face of innocence. And in these shrouded vaults are all his sins and
yours preserved and kept in darkness where they cannot be perceived as
errors, which the light would surely show. You can be neither blamed for
what you are, nor can you change the things it makes you do. And you are
each the symbol of your sins to one another, silently, and yet with
ceaseless urgency condemning still your brother for the hated thing you
are.

<sup>49</sup> Concepts are learned. They are not natural. Apart from learning, they
do not exist. They are not given, and they must be made. Not one of them
is true, and many come from feverish imaginations, hot with hatred and
distortions born of fear. What is a concept but a thought to which its
maker gives a meaning of his own? Concepts maintain the world. But they
cannot be used to demonstrate the world is real. For all of them are
made within the world, born in its shadow, growing in its ways, and
finally “maturing” in its thought. They are ideas of idols painted with
the brushes of the world, which cannot make a single picture
representing truth.

<sup>50</sup> A concept of the self is meaningless, for no one here can see what it
is *for* and therefore cannot picture what it *is*. Yet is all learning
which the world directs begun and ended with the single aim of teaching
you this concept of yourself, that you will choose to follow this
world's laws and never seek to go beyond its roads nor realize the way
you see yourself. Now must the Holy Spirit find a way to help you see
this concept of the self must be undone if any peace of mind is to be
given you. Nor can it be unlearned except by lessons aimed to teach that
you are something *else*. For otherwise you would be asked to make
exchange of what you now believe for total loss of self, and greater
terror would arise in you.

<sup>51</sup> Thus are the Holy Spirit's lesson plans arranged in easy steps that
though there be some lack of ease at times and some distress, there is
no shattering of what was learned, but just a re-translation of what
seems to be the evidence on its behalf. Let us consider then what proof
there is that you are what your brother made of you. For even though you
do not yet perceive that this is what you think, you surely learned by
now that you *behave* as if it were. Does *he* react for *you*? And did
he know exactly what would happen? Could he see your future and ordain
before it came what you should do in every circumstance? He must have
made the world as well as you to have such prescience in the things to
come.

<sup>52</sup> That you are what your brother made of you seems most unlikely. Even
if he did, who gave the face of innocence to you? Is this *your*
contribution? Who is, then, the “you” who made it? And who is deceived
by all your goodness and attacks it so? Let us forget the concept's
foolishness and merely think of this—there are two parts to what you
think yourself to be. If one was generated by your brother, who was
there to make the other? And from whom must something be kept hidden? If
the world be evil, there is still no need to hide what *you* are made
of. Who is there to see? And what but is attacked could *need* defense?

<sup>53</sup> Perhaps the reason why this concept must be kept in darkness is that
in the light the one who would not think it true is *you*. And what
would happen to the world you know if all its underpinnings were
removed? Your concept of the world *depends* upon this concept of the
self. And both would go if either one were ever raised to doubt. The
Holy Spirit does not seek to throw you into panic. So He merely asks if
just a *little* question might be raised.

<sup>54</sup> There are alternatives about the thing that you must be. You might
for instance be the thing you chose to have your *brother* be. This
shifts the concept of the self from what is wholly passive and at least
makes way for active choice and some acknowledgment that interaction
must have entered in. There is some understanding that you chose for
both of you, and what he represents has meaning that was given it by
you. It also shows some glimmering of sight into perception's law that
what you see reflects the state of \[the\] *perceiver's* mind. Yet who
was it that did the choosing first? If you are what you chose your
brother be, alternatives were there to choose among, and someone must
have first decided on the one to choose and let the others go.

<sup>55</sup> Although this step has gains, it does not yet approach a basic
question. Something must have gone *before* these concepts of the self.
And something must have done the learning which gave rise to them. Nor
can this be explained by either view. The main advantage of the shifting
to the second from the first is that *you* somehow entered in the choice
by your decision. But this gain is paid in almost equal loss, for now
*you* stand accused of guilt for what your brother is. And you must
share his guilt because you chose it for him in the image of your own.
While only he was treacherous before, now must you be condemned along
with him.

<sup>56</sup> The concept of the self has always been the great preoccupation of
the world. And everyone believes that he must find the answer to the
riddle of himself. Salvation can be seen as nothing more than the
*escape* from concepts. It does not concern itself with content of the
mind, but with the simple statement that it *thinks*. And what can think
has choice and *can* be shown that different thoughts have different
consequence. So it can learn that everything it thinks reflects the deep
confusion that it feels about how it was made and what it is. And
vaguely does the concept of the self appear to answer what it does not
know.

<sup>57</sup> Seek not your Self in symbols. There can *be* no concept that can
stand for what you are. What matters it which concept you accept while
you perceive a self which interacts with evil and reacts to wicked
things? Your concept of yourself will still remain quite meaningless.
And you will not perceive that you can interact but with yourself. To
see a guilty world is but the sign your learning has been guided by the
world, and you behold it as you see yourself. The concept of the self
embraces all you look upon, and nothing is outside of this perception.
If you can be hurt by anything, you see a picture of your secret wishes.
Nothing more than this. And in your suffering of any kind, you see your
own concealed desire to kill.

<sup>58</sup> You will make many concepts of the self as learning goes along. Each
one will show the changes in your own relationships as your perception
of yourself is changed. There will be some confusion every time there is
a shift, but be you thankful that the learning of the world is loosening
its grasp upon your mind. And be you sure and happy in the confidence
that it will go at last and leave your mind at peace. The role of the
accuser will appear in many places and in many forms. And each will seem
to be accusing *you*. Yet have no fear it will not be undone.

<sup>59</sup> The world can teach no images of you unless you *want* to learn them.
There will come a time when images have all gone by, and you will see
you know not what you are. It is to this unsealed and open mind that
truth returns, unhindered and unbound. Where concepts of the self have
been laid by is truth revealed exactly as it *is*. When every concept
has been raised to doubt and question and been recognized as made on no
assumptions which would stand the light, then is the truth left free to
enter in its sanctuary, clean and free of guilt. There is no statement
that the world is more afraid to hear than this:

<sup>60</sup> *I do not know the thing I am and therefore do not know what I am
doing, where I am, or how to look upon the world or on myself.*

<sup>61</sup> Yet in this learning is salvation born. And what you are will *tell*
you of Itself.

