---
chapter: Thirty One
ctitle: The Simplicity of Salvation
title: The Real Alternative
ref: Tx.31.IV
---

<sup>33</sup> There is a tendency to think the world can offer consolation and
escape from problems which its purpose is to *keep*. Why should this be?
Because it is a place where choice among illusions seems to be the
*only* choice. And you are in control of outcomes of your choosing. Thus
you think within the narrow band from birth to death a little time is
given you to use for you alone, a time when everyone conflicts with you,
but you can choose which road will lead you out of conflict and away
from difficulties which concern you not. Yet they *are* your concern.
How then can you escape from them by leaving them behind? What must go
with you, you will take with you whatever road you choose to walk along.

<sup>34</sup> *Real* choice is no illusion. But the world has none to offer. All
its roads but lead to disappointment, nothingness, and death. There *is*
no choice in its alternatives. Seek not escape from problems here. The
world was made that problems could not *be* escaped. Be not deceived by
all the different names its roads are given. They have but one end. And
each is but the means to gain that end, for it is here that all its
roads will lead, however differently they seem to start, however
differently they seem to go. Their end is certain, for there is no
choice among them. All of them will lead to death. On some you travel
gaily for a while before the bleakness enters. And on some the thorns
are felt at once. The choice is not *what* will the ending be but *when*
it comes.

<sup>35</sup> There is no choice where every end is sure. Perhaps you would prefer
to try them all before you really learn they are but one. The roads this
world can offer seem to be quite large in number, but the time must come
when everyone begins to see how like they are to one another. Men have
died on seeing this because they saw no way except the pathways offered
by the world. And learning they led nowhere, lost their hope. And yet
this was the time they could have learned their greatest lesson. All
must reach this point and go beyond it. It is true indeed there is no
choice at all within the world. But this is not the lesson in itself.
The lesson has a purpose, and in *this* you come to understand what it
is *for*.

<sup>36</sup> Why would you seek to try another road, another person, or another
place when you have learned the way the lesson starts but do not yet
perceive what it is for? Its purpose is the *answer* to the search that
all must undertake who still believe there is another answer to be
found. Learn now, without despair, there is no hope of answer in the
world. But do not judge the lesson which is but *begun* with this. Seek
not another signpost in the world which seems to point to still another
road. No longer look for hope where there is none. Make fast your
learning *now*, and understand you but waste time unless you go beyond
what you have learned to what is yet to learn. For from this lowest
point will learning lead to heights of happiness in which you see the
purpose of the lesson shining clear, and perfectly within your learning
grasp.

<sup>37</sup> Who would be willing to be turned away from all the roadways of the
world unless he understood their real futility? Is it not needful that
he should begin with this, to seek another way instead? For while he
sees a choice where there is none, what power of decision can he use?
The great release of power must begin with learning where it really has
a *use*. And what decision has power if it be applied in situations
without choice?

<sup>38</sup> The learning that the world can offer but one choice, no matter what
its form may be, is the beginning of acceptance that there is a *real*
alternative instead. To fight against this step is to defeat your
purpose here. You did not come to learn to find a road the world does
not contain. The search for different pathways in the world is but the
search for different forms of truth. And this would *keep* the truth
from being reached.

<sup>39</sup> Think not that happiness is ever found by following a road *away*
from it. This makes no sense and *cannot* be the way. To you who seem to
find this course to be too difficult to learn, let me repeat that to
achieve a goal you must proceed in its direction, *not* away from it.
And every road that leads the other way will not advance the purpose to
be found. If *this* be difficult to understand, then *is* this course
impossible to learn. But only then. For otherwise, it is a simple
teaching in the obvious.

<sup>40</sup> There *is* a choice which you have power to make when you have seen
the real alternatives. Until that point is reached, you *have* no
choice, and you can but decide how you would choose the better to
deceive yourself again. This course attempts to teach no more than that
the power of decision cannot lie in choosing different forms of what is
still the *same* illusion and the *same* mistake. All choices in the
world depend on this—you choose between your brother and yourself, and
you will gain as much as he will lose, and what you lose is what is
given him. How utterly opposed to truth is this, when the lesson's
purpose is to teach that what your brother loses *you* have lost and
what he gains is what is given *you*.

<sup>41</sup> He has not left His Thoughts! But you forgot His Presence and
remembered not His Love. No pathway in the world can lead to Him, nor
any worldly goal is one with His. What road in all the world will lead
within, when every road was made to separate the journey from the
purpose it *must* have unless it be but futile wandering? All roads that
lead away from what you are will lead you to confusion and despair. Yet
has He never left His Thoughts to die, without their Source forever in
themselves. He has not left His Thoughts! He could no more depart from
them than they could keep Him out. In unity with Him do they abide, and
in their Oneness both are kept complete.

<sup>42</sup> There *is* no road that leads away from Him. A journey from
*yourself* does not exist. How foolish and insane it is to think that
there could be a road with such an aim! Where could it go? And how could
you be made to travel on it, walking there without your own reality at
one with you? Forgive yourself your madness and forget all senseless
journeys and all goal-less aims. They have no meaning. You can not
escape from what you are. For God *is* merciful and did not let His Son
abandon Him. For what He is, be thankful, for in that is your escape
from madness and from death. Nowhere but where He is can *you* be found.
There *is* no path that does not lead to Him.

