---
chapter: Thirty One
ctitle: The Simplicity of Salvation
title: The Savior’s Vision
ref: Tx.31.VII
---

<sup>68</sup> Learning is change. Salvation does not seek to use a means as yet too
alien to your thinking to be helpful nor to make the kinds of change you
could not recognize. Concepts are needed while perception lasts, and
*changing* concepts is salvation's task. For it must deal in contrasts,
not in truth, which has no opposite and cannot change. In this world's
concepts are the guilty “bad;” the “good” are innocent. And no one here
but holds a concept of himself in which he counts the “good” to pardon
him the “bad.” Nor does he trust the “good” in anyone, believing that
the “bad” must lurk behind. This concept emphasizes treachery, and trust
becomes impossible. Nor could it change while you perceive the “bad” in
*you*.

<sup>69</sup> You could not *recognize* your “evil” thoughts as long as you see
value in attack. You will perceive them sometimes, but will not see them
as meaningless. And so they come in fearful form, with content still
concealed, to shake your sorry concept of yourself and blacken it with
still another “crime.” You cannot give yourself your innocence, for you
are too confused about yourself. But should *one* brother dawn upon your
sight as wholly worthy of forgiveness, then your concept of yourself
*is* wholly changed*. Your* “evil” thoughts have been forgiven with his,
because you let them all affect you not. No longer did you choose that
you should be the sign of evil and of guilt in him. And as you gave your
trust to what is good in him, you gave it to the good in you.

<sup>70</sup> In terms of concepts, it is thus you see him more than just a body,
for the good is never what the body seems to be. The actions of the body
are perceived as coming from the “baser” part of you and thus of him as
well. By focusing upon the good in him, the body grows decreasingly
persistent in your sight and will at length be seen as little more than
just a shadow circling round the good. And this will be your concept of
*yourself*, when you have reached the world beyond the sight your eyes
alone can offer you to see. For you will not interpret what you see
without the Aid that God has given you. And in His sight there *is*
another world.

<sup>71</sup> You live in that world just as much as this. For both are concepts of
yourself which can be interchanged, but never jointly held. The contrast
is far greater than you think, for you will love this concept of
yourself because it was not made for you alone. Born as a gift for
someone not perceived to be yourself, it has been given *you*. For your
forgiveness, offered unto him, has been accepted now for *both* of you.

<sup>72</sup> Have faith in him who walks with you, so that your fearful concept of
yourself may change. And look upon the good in him that you may not be
frightened by your “evil” thoughts because they do not cloud your view
of him. And all this shift requires is that you be *willing* that this
happy change occur. No more than this is asked. On its behalf, remember
what the concept of yourself which now you hold has brought you in its
wake, and welcome the glad contrast offered you. Hold out your hand that
you may have the gift of kind forgiveness which you offer one whose need
for it is just the same as yours. And let the cruel concept of yourself
be changed to one which brings the peace of God.

<sup>73</sup> The concept of yourself which now you hold would guarantee your
function here remain forever unaccomplished and undone. And thus it
dooms you to a bitter sense of deep depression and futility. Yet it need
not be fixed unless you choose to hold it past the hope of change and
keep it static and concealed within your mind. Give it instead to Him
Who understands the changes that it needs to let it serve the function
given you to bring you peace that you may offer peace to have it yours.
Alternatives are in your mind to use, and you *can* see yourself another
way. Would you not rather look upon yourself as *needed* for salvation
of the world instead of as salvation's enemy?

<sup>74</sup> The concept of the self stands like a shield, a silent barricade
before the truth, and hides it from your sight. All things you see are
images because you look on them as through a barrier which dims your
sight and warps your vision, so that you behold nothing with clarity.
The light is kept from everything you see. At most, you glimpse a shadow
of what lies beyond. At least, you merely look on darkness and perceive
the terrified imaginings that come from guilty thoughts and concepts
born of fear. And what you see is hell, for fear *is* hell. All that is
given you is for release—the sight, the vision, and the inner Guide all
lead you out of hell with those you love beside you and the universe
with them.

<sup>75</sup> Behold your role within the universe! To every part of true creation
has the Lord of Love and Life entrusted *all* salvation from the misery
of hell. And to each one has He allowed the grace to be a savior to the
holy ones especially entrusted to his care. And this he learns when
first he looks upon *one* brother as he looks upon himself and sees the
mirror of himself in him. Thus is the concept of himself laid by, for
nothing stands between his sight and what he looks upon to judge what he
beholds. And in this single vision does he see the face of Christ and
understands he looks on everyone as he beholds this One. For there is
light where darkness was before, and now the veil is lifted from his
sight.

<sup>76</sup> The veil across the face of Christ, the fear of God and of salvation,
and the love of guilt and death, they all are different names for just
one error—that there is a space between you and your brother, kept apart
by an illusion of yourself which holds him off from you and you away
from him. The sword of judgment is the weapon which you give to the
illusion of yourself that it may fight to keep the space that holds your
brother off unoccupied by love. Yet while you hold this sword, you must
perceive the body as yourself, for you are bound to separation from the
sight of him who holds the mirror to another view of what he is and thus
what *you* must be.

<sup>77</sup> What is temptation but the *wish* to stay in hell and misery? And
what could this give rise to but an image of yourself that *can* be
miserable and remain in hell and torment? Who has learned to see his
brother *not* as this has saved himself, and thus is he a savior to the
rest. To everyone has God entrusted all, because a partial savior would
be one who is but partly saved. The holy ones whom God has given each of
you to save are everyone you meet or look upon, not knowing who they
are, all those you saw an instant and forgot, and those you knew a long
while since, and those you will yet meet, the unremembered and the not
yet born. For God has given you His Son to save from every concept that
he ever held.

<sup>78</sup> Yet while you wish to stay in hell, how could you be the savior of
the Son of God? How would you know his holiness while you see him apart
from yours? For holiness is seen through holy eyes that look upon the
innocence within and thus expect to see it everywhere. And so they call
it forth in everyone they look upon that he may be what they expect of
him. This is the savior's vision—that he see his innocence in all he
looks upon and sees his own salvation everywhere. He holds no concept of
himself between his calm and open eyes and what he sees. He *brings* the
light to what he looks upon, that he may see it as it really is.

<sup>79</sup> Whatever form temptation seems to take, it always but reflects a wish
to be a self which you are not. And from that wish, a concept rises,
teaching that you *are* the thing you wish to be. It will remain your
concept of yourself until the wish that fathered it no longer is held
dear. But while you cherish it, you will behold your brother in the
likeness of the self whose image has the wish begot of *you*. For vision
*can* but represent a wish, because it has no power to create. Yet it
can look with love or look with hate, depending only on the simple
choice of whether you would join with what you see or keep yourself
apart and separate.

<sup>80</sup> The savior's vision is as innocent of what your brother is as it is
free of any judgment made upon yourself. It sees no past in anyone at
all. And thus it serves a wholly open mind, unclouded by old concepts
and prepared to look on only what the present holds. It cannot judge
because it does not know. And *recognizing* this, it merely asks, “What
is the meaning of what I behold?” Then is the answer given. And the door
held open for the face of Christ to shine upon the one who asks in
innocence to see beyond the veil of old ideas and ancient concepts held
so long and dear *against* the vision of the Christ in you.

<sup>81</sup> Be vigilant against temptation, then, remembering that it is but a
wish, insane and meaningless, to make yourself a thing which you are
not. And think as well upon the thing that you would be instead. It is a
thing of madness, pain, and death; a thing of treachery and black
despair, of failing dreams and no remaining hope except to die and end
the dream of fear. *This* is temptation, nothing more than this. Can
*this* be difficult to choose *against*? Consider what temptation *is*,
and see the real alternatives you choose between. There *are* but two.
Be not deceived by what appears as many choices. There is hell or
Heaven, and of these you choose but *one*.

<sup>82</sup> Let not the world's light, given unto you, be hidden from the world.
It *needs* the light, for it is dark indeed, and men despair because the
savior's vision is withheld, and what they see is death. Their savior
stands, unknowing and unknown, beholding them with eyes unopened. And
they cannot see until he looks on them with seeing eyes and offers them
forgiveness with his own. Can you to whom God says, “Release My Son!” be
tempted not to listen when you learn that it is *you* for whom He asks
release? And what but this is what this course would teach? And what but
this is there for you to learn?

