---
chapter: Fourteen
ctitle: Bringing Illusions to Truth
title: The Test of Truth
ref: Tx.14.VII
---

<sup>58</sup> Yet the essential thing is learning that *you do not know*. Knowledge
is power, and all power is of God. You who have tried to keep power for
yourselves have lost it. You still have the power, but you have
interposed so much between it and your *awareness* of it that you cannot
use it. Everything you have taught yourselves has made your power more
and more obscure to you. You know not *what* it is nor *where*. You have
made a semblance of power and a show of strength so pitiful that it
*must* fail you. For power is not a seeming strength, and truth is
beyond semblance of any kind. Yet all that stands between you and the
power of God in you is but your learning of the false and your attempts
to undo the true.

<sup>59</sup> Be willing, then, for all of it to be undone, and be glad that you
are not bound to it forever. For you have taught yourselves how to
imprison the Son of God, a lesson so unthinkable that only the insane,
in deepest sleep, could even dream of it. Can God learn how *not* to be
God? And can His Son, given all power by Him, learn to be powerless?
What have you taught yourselves that you can possibly prefer to keep in
place of what you *have* and what you *are*?

<sup>60</sup> Atonement teaches you how to escape forever from everything that you
have taught yourselves in the past by showing you only what you are
*now*. Learning *has been* accomplished before its effects are manifest.
Learning is therefore in the past, but its influence determines the
present by giving it whatever meaning it holds for you. *Your* learning
gives the present no meaning at all. Nothing you have ever learned can
help you understand the present or teach you how to undo the past. Your
past *is* what you have taught yourselves. *Let it all go*. Do not
attempt to understand any event or anything or anyone in its light, for
the light of darkness by which you try to see can *only* obscure.

<sup>61</sup> Put no confidence at all in darkness to illuminate your
understanding, for if you do, you contradict the light and thereby
*think* you see the darkness. Yet darkness cannot *be* seen, for it is
nothing more than a condition in which seeing becomes impossible. You
who have not yet brought all of the darkness you have taught yourselves
unto the light in you can hardly judge the truth and value of this
course. Yet God did not abandon you. And so you have another lesson sent
from Him, *already* learned for every Child of light by Him to Whom God
gave it. This lesson shines with God's glory, for in it lies His power,
which He shares so gladly with His Son.

<sup>62</sup> Learn of His happiness, which is *yours*. But to accomplish this, all
your dark lessons must be brought willingly to truth and joyously laid
down by hands open to receive, not closed to take. Every dark lesson
that you bring to Him Who teaches light He will accept from you because
you do not want it. And He will gladly *exchange* each one for the
bright lesson He has learned for you. Never believe that any lesson you
have learned *apart* from Him means anything.

<sup>63</sup> You have one test, as sure as God, by which to recognize if what you
learned is true. If you are wholly free of fear of any kind, and if all
those who meet or even think of you share in your perfect peace, then
you can be sure that you have learned God's lesson and not yours. Unless
all this is true, there *are* dark lessons in your minds which hurt and
hinder you and everyone around you. The *absence* of perfect peace means
but *one* thing: you *think* you do not will for God's Son what His
Father wills for him. Every dark lesson teaches this in one form or
another. And each bright lesson, with which the Holy Spirit will replace
the dark ones you do not accept and hide, teaches you that you will
*with* the Father unto His Son.

<sup>64</sup> Do not be concerned how you can learn a lesson so completely
different from everything you have taught yourselves. How would you
know? Your part is very simple. You need only recognize that everything
you learned you do not *want*. Ask to be *taught* and do not use your
experiences to confirm what *you* have learned. When your peace is
threatened or disturbed in any way, say to yourself,

<sup>65</sup> *I do not know what anything, **including this,** means.<br/>
And so I do not know how to respond to it.<br/>
And I will not use my own past learning as the light to guide me now.*

<sup>66</sup> By this refusal to attempt to teach yourself what you do not know,
the Guide Whom God has given you will speak to you. He will take His
rightful place in your awareness the instant *you* abandon it and offer
it to Him.

<sup>67</sup> *You* cannot be your guide to miracles, for it is you who made them
necessary. And *because* you did, the means on which you can depend for
miracles has been provided *for* you. God's Son can make no needs His
Father will not meet if he but turn to Him ever so little. Yet He cannot
compel His Son to turn to Him and remain Himself. It is impossible that
God lose His Identity, for if He did, you would lose *yours*. And being
yours, He cannot change Himself, for your identity *is* changeless. The
miracle acknowledges His changelessness by seeing His Son as he always
was and not as he would make himself. The miracle brings the effects
which *only* guiltlessness can bring and thus establishes the fact that
guiltlessness must *be*.

<sup>68</sup> How can you, so firmly bound to guilt and committed so to remain,
establish for yourself your guiltlessness? That is impossible. But be
sure that you are willing to acknowledge that it *is* impossible. It is
only because you think that you can run some little part or deal with
certain aspects of your lives alone that the guidance of the Holy Spirit
is limited. Thus would you make *Him* undependable and use this fancied
undependability as an excuse for keeping certain dark lessons from Him.
And by so limiting the guidance that you would *accept*, you are unable
to depend on miracles to answer all your problems for you.

<sup>69</sup> Do you think that what the Holy Spirit would have you *give* He would
*withhold* from you? You have *no* problems which He cannot solve by
offering you a miracle. Miracles are for *you*. And every fear or pain
or trial you have *has been* undone. He has brought all of them to
light, having accepted them *instead* of you and recognized they never
were. There are no dark lessons He has not *already* lightened for you.
The lessons you would teach yourselves He has corrected already. They do
not exist in His Mind at all. For the past binds Him not and therefore
binds not you. He does not see time as you do. And each miracle He
offers you corrects your use of time and makes it His.

<sup>70</sup> He Who has freed you from the past would teach you *are* free of it.
He would but have you accept His accomplishments as *yours* because he
did them *for* you. And because he did, they *are* yours. He has made
you free of what you made. You can deny Him, but you *cannot* call on
Him in vain. He *always* gives what He has made *in place* of you. He
would establish His bright teaching so firmly in your mind that no dark
lessons of guilt can abide in what He has established as holy by His
Presence. Thank God that He is there and works through you. And all His
works are yours. He offers you a miracle with every one you let Him do
through you.

<sup>71</sup> God's Son will *always* be indivisible. As we are held as one in God,
so do we learn as one in Him. God's Teacher is as like to His Creator as
is His Son, and through His Teacher does God proclaim His Oneness *and*
His Son's. Listen in silence, and do not raise your voice against Him.
For He teaches the miracle of oneness, and before His lesson division
disappears. Teach like Him here, and you will remember that you have
*always* created like your Father. The miracle of creation has never
ceased, having the holy stamp of immortality upon it. This is the Will
of God for all creation, and all creation joins in willing this.

<sup>72</sup> Those who remember always that they know nothing, but who have become
willing to learn *everything*, will learn it. But whenever they trust
themselves, they will *not* learn. They have destroyed their motivation
for learning by thinking they *already* know. Think not you understand
anything until you pass the test of perfect peace, for peace and
understanding go together and never can be found alone. Each brings the
other *with* it, for it is the law of God they be not separate. They are
cause and effect, each to the other, so where one is absent the other
*cannot* be.

<sup>73</sup> Only those who see they cannot know *unless* the effects of
understanding are with them can really learn at all. And for this, it
must be peace they *want* and nothing else. Whenever you think *you*
know, peace will depart from you because you have abandoned the Teacher
of Peace. Whenever you fully realize that you know *not*, peace will
return, for you will have invited Him to do so by abandoning the ego on
behalf of Him. Call not upon the ego for anything. It is only *this*
that you need do. The Holy Spirit will, of *Himself*, fill every mind
that so makes room for Him.

<sup>74</sup> If you want peace, you must abandon the teacher of attack. The
Teacher of peace will *never* abandon you. You can desert Him, but He
will never reciprocate, for His faith in you *is* His understanding. It
is as firm as is His faith in His Creator, and He knows that faith in
His Creator *must* encompass faith in His creation. In this consistency
lies His holiness, which He cannot abandon, for it is not His Will to do
so. With your perfection ever in His sight, He gives the gift of peace
to everyone who perceives the need for peace and who would have it. Make
way for peace, and it will come. For understanding is in you, and from
it peace *must* come.

<sup>75</sup> The power of God, from which they both arise, is yours as surely as
it is His. You think you know Him not only because, alone, it is
impossible to know Him. Yet see the mighty works that He will do through
you, and you must be convinced you did them through Him. It is
impossible to deny the Source of effects so powerful they *could* not be
of you. Leave room for Him, and you will find yourself so filled with
power that *nothing* will prevail against your peace. And this will be
the test by which you recognize that you have understood.

