---
chapter: Fourteen
ctitle: Bringing Illusions to Truth
title: The Shift to Miracles
ref: Tx.14.VI
---

<sup>46</sup> When no perception stands between God and His creations, or between
His Children and their own, the knowledge of creation must continue
forever. The reflections which you accept into the mirror of your minds
in time but bring eternity nearer or farther. But eternity itself is
beyond *all* time. Reach out of time and touch it, with the help of its
reflection in you. And you will turn from time to holiness as surely as
the reflection of holiness calls everyone to lay all guilt aside.
Reflect the peace of Heaven *here* and bring this world to Heaven. For
the reflection of truth draws everyone *to* truth, and as they enter
into it, they leave all reflections behind.

<sup>47</sup> In Heaven reality is shared and not reflected. By sharing its
reflection here, its truth becomes the only perception the Son of God
accepts. And thus, remembrance of his Father dawns on him, and he can no
longer be satisfied with anything but his own reality. You on earth have
no conception of limitlessness, for the world you seem to live in *is* a
world of limits. In this world, it is not true that anything without
order of difficulty can occur. The miracle, therefore, has a unique
function and is motivated by a unique Teacher, Who brings the laws of
another world to this one. The miracle is the *one* thing you can do
that transcends order, being based not on differences but on equality.

<sup>48</sup> Miracles are not in competition, and the number of them that you can
do is limitless. They can be simultaneous and legion. This is not
difficult to understand, once you conceive of them as possible at all.
What *is* more difficult to grasp is the lack of order of difficulty
which stamps the miracle as something that must come from elsewhere, not
from here. From the world's viewpoint, this is impossible. You have
experienced lack of competition among your thoughts, which, even though
they may conflict, can occur to you together and in great numbers. You
are so used to this that it can cause you little surprise.

<sup>49</sup> Yet you are also used to classifying some of your thoughts as more
important, larger or better, wiser or more productive and valuable than
others. And this is true about the thoughts which cross the mind of
those who think they live apart. For some are reflections of Heaven,
while others are motivated by the ego, which but *seems* to think. The
result is a weaving, changing pattern which never rests and is never
still. It shifts unceasingly across the mirror of your mind, and the
reflections of Heaven last but a moment and grow dim as darkness blots
them out. Where there was light, darkness removes it in an instant, and
alternating patterns of light and darkness sweep constantly across your
minds.

<sup>50</sup> The little sanity which still remains is held together by a sense of
order which *you* establish. Yet the very fact that you can *do* this
and bring *any* order into chaos shows you that you are not an ego and
that more than an ego *must* be in you. For the ego *is* chaos, and if
it were all of you, no order at all would be possible. Yet though the
order which you impose upon your minds limits the ego, it *also* limits
*you*. To order is to judge and to arrange *by* judgment. \[Therefore,
it is not your function, but the Holy Spirit's.\] It will seem difficult
for you to learn that you have no basis *at all* for ordering your
thoughts. This lesson the Holy Spirit teaches by giving you shining
examples to show you that your way of ordering is wrong, but that a
better way is offered you.

<sup>51</sup> The miracle offers exactly the same response to every call for help.
It does not judge the call. It merely recognizes what it *is* and
answers accordingly. It does not consider which call is louder or
greater or more important. You may wonder how you who are still bound to
judgment can be asked to do that which requires no judgment of your own.
The answer is very simple. The power of God, and *not* of you, engenders
miracles. The miracle itself is but the witness that you have the power
of God in you. That is the reason why the miracle gives equal blessing
to all who share in it, and that is also why *everyone* shares in it.
The power of God is limitless. And being always maximal, it offers
*everything* to *every* call from *anyone*. There *is* no order of
difficulty here. A call for help is given help.

<sup>52</sup> The only judgment involved at all is the Holy Spirit's *one* division
into two categories—one of love and the other the call for love. *You*
cannot safely make this division, for you are much too confused either
to recognize love or to believe that everything else is nothing but a
need for love. You are too bound to form and not to content. What you
consider content is not content at all. It is merely form, and nothing
else. For you do not respond to what a brother *really* offers you, but
only to the particular perception of his offering by which the ego
judges it.

<sup>53</sup> The ego is incapable of understanding content and is totally
unconcerned with it. To the ego, if the form is acceptable, the content
*must* be. Otherwise, it will attack the form. You who believe you
understand something of the dynamics of the mind, let me assure you that
you know nothing of it at all. For of yourselves you *could* not know of
it. The study of the ego is *not* the study of the mind. In fact, the
ego enjoys the study of itself and thoroughly approves the undertakings
of students who would analyze it, approving its importance. Yet they but
study form with meaningless content. For their teacher is senseless,
though careful to conceal this fact behind a lot of words which sound
impressive but which lack any consistent sense when they are put
*together*.

<sup>54</sup> This is characteristic of the ego's judgments. Separately, they seem
to hold, but put them together and the system of thought which arises
from joining them is incoherent and utterly chaotic. For form is not
enough for meaning, and the underlying lack of content makes a cohesive
system impossible. Separation therefore remains the ego's chosen
condition. For no one alone can judge the ego truly. Yet when two or
more *join together* in searching for truth, the ego can no longer
defend its lack of content. The fact of union *tells* them it is not
true.

<sup>55</sup> It is impossible to remember God in secret and alone. For remembering
Him means you are *not* alone and willing to remember it. Take no
thought for yourself, for no thought you hold *is* for yourself. If you
would remember your Father, let the Holy Spirit order your thoughts and
give only the answer with which He answers you. Everyone seeks for love
as you do and knows it not unless he joins with you in seeking it. If
you undertake the search together, you bring with you a light so
powerful that what you see is *given* meaning. The lonely journey fails
because it has excluded what it would *find*.

<sup>56</sup> As God communicates to the Holy Spirit in you, so does the Holy
Spirit translate His communications *through* you so *you* can
understand them. God has no secret communications, for everything of Him
is perfectly open and freely accessible to all, being *for* all. Nothing
lives in secret, and what you would hide from the Holy Spirit is
nothing. Every interpretation *you* would lay upon a brother is
senseless. Let the Holy Spirit *show* him to you and teach you both his
love and need for love. Neither his mind *nor yours* holds more than
these two orders of thought.

<sup>57</sup> The miracle is the recognition that this is true. Where there is
love, your brother must give it to you because of what it *is*. But
where there is *need* for love, *you* must give it because of what *you*
are. Long ago we said this course will teach you what you are, restoring
to you your identity. We have already learned that this identity is
shared. The miracle becomes the *means* of sharing it. By supplying your
identity wherever it is *not* recognized, *you* will recognize it. And
God Himself, Who wills to be with His Son forever, will bless each
recognition of His Son with all the love He holds for him. Nor will the
power of *all* His love be absent from any miracle you offer to His Son.
How, then, can there be any order of difficulty among them?

