---
chapter: Fourteen
ctitle: Bringing Illusions to Truth
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.14.I
---

Unless you are guiltless, you cannot know God, Whose Will is that you
know Him. Therefore, you *must* be guiltless. Yet if you do not accept
the necessary conditions for knowing Him, you have denied Him and do not
recognize Him, though He is all around you. He cannot be known without
His Son, whose guiltlessness is the condition for knowing Him. Accepting
His Son as guilty is denial of the Father so complete that knowledge is
swept away from recognition in the very mind where God Himself has
placed it. If you would but listen and learn how impossible this is! Do
not endow Him with attributes you understand. You made Him not, and
anything you understand is not of Him.

<sup>2</sup> Your task is not to make reality. It is here without your making, but
not without *you*. You who have thrown your selves away and valued God
so little, hear me speak for Him and for yourselves. You cannot
understand how much your Father loves you, for there is no parallel in
your experience of the world to help you understand it. There is nothing
on earth with which it can compare and nothing you have ever felt, apart
from Him, that resembles it ever so faintly. You cannot even give a
blessing in perfect gentleness. Would you know of One Who gives forever
and Who knows of nothing *except* giving?

<sup>3</sup> The Children of Heaven live in the light of the blessing of their
Father because they *know* that they are sinless. The Atonement was
established as the means of restoring guiltlessness to the mind which
has denied it and thus denied Heaven to itself. Atonement teaches you
the true condition of the Son of God. It does not teach you what you are
or what your Father is. The Holy Spirit, Who remembers this for you,
merely teaches you how to remove the blocks that stand between you and
what you know. His memory is *yours*. If you remember what *you* have
made, you are remembering nothing. Remembrance of reality is in Him and
*therefore* in you.

