---
chapter: Fourteen
ctitle: Bringing Illusions to Truth
title: Out of the Darkness
ref: Tx.14.III
---

<sup>16</sup> The journey that we undertake together is the exchange of dark for
light, of ignorance for understanding. Nothing you understand is
fearful. It is only in darkness and in ignorance that you perceive the
frightening, and you shrink away from it to further darkness. And yet it
is only the hidden that can terrify, not for what it *is*, but for its
hiddenness. The obscure is frightening *because* you do not understand
its meaning. If you did, it would be clear, and you would be no longer
in the dark. Nothing has *hidden* value, for what is hidden cannot be
shared, and so its value is unknown. The hidden is *kept apart*, but
value always lies in joint appreciation. What is concealed cannot be
loved, and so it *must* be feared.

<sup>17</sup> The quiet light in which the Holy Spirit dwells within you is merely
perfect openness in which nothing is hidden and therefore nothing is
fearful. Attack will *always* yield to love if it is *brought* to love,
not hidden *from* it. There is no darkness that the light of love will
not dispel, unless it is concealed from love's beneficence. What is kept
*apart* from love cannot share its healing power, because it has been
separated off and kept in darkness. The sentinels of darkness watch over
it carefully, and you who made these guardians of illusion out of
nothing are now afraid of them.

<sup>18</sup> Would you *continue* to give imagined power to these strange ideas of
safety? They are neither safe nor unsafe. They do not protect; neither
do they attack. They do nothing at all, *being* nothing at all. As
guardians of darkness and of ignorance, look to them only for fear, for
what they keep obscure *is* fearful. But let them go, and what was
fearful will be so no longer. Without protection of obscurity, *only*
the light of love remains, for only this *has* meaning and *can* live in
light. Everything else *must* disappear.

<sup>19</sup> Death yields to life simply because destruction is not *true.* The
light of guiltlessness shines guilt away because, when they are brought
*together*, the truth of one *must* make the falsity of its opposite
perfectly clear. Keep not guilt and guiltlessness apart, for your belief
that you can have them *both* is meaningless. All you have done by
keeping them apart is lose their meaning by confusing them with each
other. And so you do not realize that only one means anything, and the
other is wholly without sense of *any* kind.

<sup>20</sup> You have interpreted the separation as a means which you have made
for breaking your communication with your Father. The Holy Spirit
reinterprets it as a means of reestablishing what has not been broken
but *has* been made obscure. All things you made have use to Him for His
most holy purpose. He *knows* you are not separate from God, but He
perceives much in your mind that lets you *think* you are. All this, and
nothing else, would He separate from you. The power of decision, which
you made *in place* of the power of creation, He would teach you how to
use on your *behalf.* You who made it to crucify yourselves must learn
of Him how to apply it to the holy cause of restoration.

<sup>21</sup> You who speak in dark and devious symbols do not understand the
language you have made. It *has* no meaning, for its purpose is not
communication, but rather the *disruption* of communication. If the
purpose of language *is* communication, how can this tongue mean
anything? Yet even this strange and twisted effort to communicate
through *not* communicating holds enough of love to *make* it meaningful
if its interpreter is *not* its maker. You who made it are but
expressing conflict, from which the Holy Spirit would release you. Leave
what you would communicate to Him. He will interpret it to you with
perfect clarity, for He knows with Whom you *are* in perfect
communication.

<sup>22</sup> You know not what you say, and so you know not what is said to you.
Yet your Interpreter perceives the meaning in your alien language. He
will not attempt to communicate the meaningless. But He *will* separate
out all that has meaning, dropping off the rest and offering your true
communication to those who would communicate as truly with you. You
speak two languages at once, and this *must* lead to unintelligibility.
Yet if one means nothing and the other everything, only that one is
possible for purposes of communication. The other but *interferes* with
it.

<sup>23</sup> The Holy Spirit's function is *entirely* communication. He therefore
must remove whatever interferes with it in order to *restore* it.
Therefore, keep no source of interference from His sight, for He will
not attack your sentinels. But bring them to Him, and let His gentleness
teach you that in the light they are not fearful and *cannot* serve to
guard the dark doors behind which nothing at all is carefully concealed.
We must open all doors and let the light come streaming through. There
are no hidden chambers in God's temple. Its gates are open wide to greet
His Son. No one can fail to come where God has called him if he close
not the door himself upon his Father's welcome.

