---
chapter: Fourteen
ctitle: Bringing Illusions to Truth
title: Guilt and Guiltlessness
ref: Tx.14.II
---

<sup>4</sup> The guiltless and the guilty are totally incapable of understanding
one another. Each perceives the other as like himself, making them
unable to communicate because each sees the other *unlike* the way he
sees *himself.* God can communicate *only* to the Holy Spirit in your
mind because only He shares the knowledge of what you are with God. And
only the Holy Spirit can *answer* God for you, for only He knows what
God *is.* Everything else that you have placed within your mind *cannot*
exist, for what is not in communication with the Mind of God has never
been. Communication with God is life. Nothing without it *is* at all.

<sup>5</sup> The only part of your mind that has reality is the part which links
you still with God. Would you have *all* of it transformed into a
radiant message of God's Love, to share with all the lonely ones who
denied Him with you? *God makes this possible*. Would you deny His
yearning to be known? You yearn for Him, as He for you. This is forever
changeless. Accept, then, the immutable. Leave the world of death
behind, and return quietly to Heaven. There is *nothing* of value here
and *everything* of value there. Listen to the Holy Spirit and to God
through Him. He speaks of you to *you*. There *is* no guilt in you, for
God is blessed in His Son as the Son is blessed in Him.

<sup>6</sup> Each one of you has a special part to play in the Atonement, but the
message given to each to share is always the same—*God's Son is
guiltless.* Each one teaches the message differently and learns it
differently. Yet until he teaches it and learns it, he will suffer the
pain of dim awareness that his true function remains unfulfilled in him.
The burden of guilt is heavy, but God would not have you bound by it.
His plan for your awaking is as perfect as yours is fallible. You know
not what you do, but He Who knows is with you. His gentleness is yours,
and all the love you share with God He holds in trust for you. He would
teach you nothing except how to be happy.

<sup>7</sup> Blessed Son of a wholly blessing Father, joy was created for *you.*
Who can condemn whom God has blessed? There is nothing in the Mind of
God that does not share His shining innocence. Creation is the natural
extension of perfect purity. Your only calling here is to devote
yourself with active willingness to the denial of guilt in all its
forms. To accuse is *not to understand*. The happy learners of the
Atonement become the teachers of the innocence that is the right of all
that God created. Deny them not what is their due, for you will not
withhold it from them alone.

<sup>8</sup> The inheritance of the Kingdom is the right of God's Son, given him in
his creation. Do not try to steal it from him, or you will *ask* for
guilt and *will* experience it. Protect his purity from every thought
that would steal it away and keep it from his sight. Bring innocence to
light in answer to the call of the Atonement. Never allow purity to
remain hidden, but shine away the heavy veils of guilt within which the
Son of God has hidden himself from his own sight. We are all joined in
the Atonement here, and nothing else can unite us in this world. So will
the world of separation slip away and full communication be restored
between the Father and the Son.

<sup>9</sup> The miracle acknowledges the guiltlessness which *must* have been
denied to produce *need* of healing. Do not withhold this glad
acknowledgment, for hope of happiness and release from suffering of
every kind lie in it. Who is there but wishes to be free of pain? He may
not yet have learned *how* to exchange his guilt for innocence nor
realize that only in this exchange can freedom from pain be his. Yet
those who have failed to learn need *teaching, not* attack. To attack
those who have need of teaching is to fail to learn from them.

<sup>10</sup> Teachers of innocence, each in his own way, have joined together,
taking their part in the unified curriculum of the Atonement. There is
no unity of learning goals apart from this. There is no conflict in this
curriculum, which has *one* aim however it is taught. Each effort made
on its behalf is offered for the single purpose of *release* from guilt
to the eternal glory of God and His creation. And every teaching that
points to this points straight to Heaven and to the peace of God. There
is no pain, no trial, no fear that teaching this can fail to overcome.
The power of God Himself supports this teaching and *guarantees* its
limitless results.

<sup>11</sup> Join your own efforts to the power that *cannot* fail and *must*
result in peace. No one can be untouched by teaching such as this. You
will not see yourself beyond the power of God if you teach only this.
You will not be exempt from the effects of this most holy lesson, which
seeks but to restore what is the right of God's creation. From everyone
whom you accord release from guilt, you will inevitably learn *your*
innocence. The circle of Atonement *has* no end. And you will find
ever-increasing confidence in your safe inclusion in what is for all in
everyone you bring within its safety and its perfect peace.

<sup>12</sup> Peace, then, be unto everyone who becomes a teacher of peace. For
peace is the acknowledgment of perfect purity from which no one is
excluded. Within its holy circle is everyone whom God created as His
Son. Joy is its unifying attribute, with no one left outside to suffer
guilt alone. The power of God draws everyone to its safe embrace of love
and union. Stand quietly within this circle and attract all tortured
minds to join with you in the safety of its peace and holiness. Abide
with me within it as teachers of Atonement, *not* of guilt.

<sup>13</sup> Blessed are you who teach with me. Our power comes not of us but of
our Father. In guiltlessness we know Him, as He knows us guiltless. I
stand within the circle, calling you to peace. Teach peace with me and
stand with me on holy ground. Remember for everyone your Father's power
that He has given him. Believe not that you cannot teach His perfect
peace. Stand not outside but join with me within. Fail not the only
purpose to which my teaching calls you. Restore to God His Son as He
created him by teaching him his innocence.

<sup>14</sup> The crucifixion has no part in the Atonement. Only the resurrection
became my part in it. That is the symbol of the release from guilt by
guiltlessness. Whom you perceive as guilty, you would crucify. Yet you
*restore* guiltlessness to whomever you see as guiltless. Crucifixion is
*always* the ego's aim. It sees *as guilty*, and by its condemnation, it
would kill. The Holy Spirit sees only guiltlessness, and in His
gentleness, He would release from fear and reestablish the reign of
love. The power of love is in His gentleness, which is of God and
therefore cannot crucify nor suffer crucifixion. The temple you restore
becomes *your* altar, for it was rebuilt through you. And everything you
give to God *is* yours. Thus He creates, and thus must *you* restore.

<sup>15</sup> Each one you see you place within the holy circle of Atonement or
leave outside, judging him fit for crucifixion or for redemption. If you
bring him *into* the circle of purity, you will rest there with him. If
you leave him *without*, you join him there. Judge not except in
quietness which is not of you. Refuse to accept anyone as *without* the
blessing of Atonement, and bring him *into* it by blessing him. Holiness
must be shared, for therein lies everything that makes it holy. Come
gladly to the holy circle, and look out in peace on all who think they
are outside. Cast no one out, for this is what he seeks, along with you.
Come, let us join him in the holy place of peace, which is for all of
us, united as one within the cause of peace.

