---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: The Extension of the Kingdom
ref: Tx.7.X
---

<sup>91</sup> Only *you* can limit your creative power, but God wills to release
it. He no more wills you to deprive yourself of your creations than He
wills to deprive Himself of His. Do not withhold your gifts to the
Sonship, or you withhold yourself from God. Selfishness is of the ego,
but self-fullness is of the Soul, because that is how God created it.
The Holy Spirit is the part of the mind that lies between the ego and
the Soul, mediating between them *always* in favor of the Soul. To the
ego, this is partiality, and it therefore responds as if it were the
part that is being sided *against*. To the Soul, this is truth, because
it knows its fullness and cannot conceive of any part from which it is
excluded.

<sup>92</sup> The Soul *knows* that the consciousness of all its brothers is
included in its own, as *it* is included in God. The power of the whole
Sonship *and* of its Creator is therefore the Soul's own fullness,
rendering its creations equally whole and equal in perfection. The ego
cannot prevail against a totality which includes God, and any totality
*must* include God. Everything He created is given all His power,
because it is part of Him and shares His Being with Him. Creating is the
opposite of loss, as blessing is the opposite of sacrifice. Being *must*
be extended. That is how it retains the knowledge of *itself.*

<sup>93</sup> The Soul yearns to share its being as *its* Creator did. Created *by*
sharing, its will is to create. It does not wish to *contain* God but to
*extend* His Being. The extension of God's Being is the Soul's *only*
function. Its fullness cannot be contained any more than can the
fullness of its Creator. Fullness *is* extension. The ego's whole
thought system blocks extension and thus blocks your only function. It
therefore blocks your joy, and that is why you perceive yourselves as
unfulfilled. Unless you create, you *are* unfulfilled; but God does not
know of unfulfillment, and therefore you *must* create. *You* may not
know your own creations, but this can no more interfere with their
reality than your unawareness of your Soul can interfere with its being.

<sup>94</sup> The Kingdom is forever extending, because it is in the Mind of God.
You do not *know* your joy, because you do not know your own
self-fullness. Exclude *any* part of the Kingdom from yourself, and you
are *not* whole. A split mind cannot perceive its fullness and needs the
miracle of its wholeness to dawn upon it and heal it. This reawakens the
wholeness in it and restores it to the Kingdom because of its
*acceptance* of wholeness. The full appreciation of its self-fullness
makes selfishness impossible and extension inevitable. That is why there
is perfect peace in the Kingdom. Every Soul *is* fulfilling its
function, and only complete fulfillment *is* peace.

<sup>95</sup> Insanity *appears* to add to reality, but no one would claim that
what it adds is true. Insanity is therefore the *non*\-extension of
truth, which blocks joy because it blocks creation and thus blocks
self-fulfillment. The unfulfilled *must* be depressed, because their
self-fullness is unknown to them. Your creations are protected *for*
you, because the Holy Spirit, Who is in your mind, knows of them and can
bring them *into* your awareness whenever you will let Him. They are
there as part of your own being, because your fulfillment *includes*
them. The creations of every Son of God are yours since every creation
belongs to everyone, being created for the Sonship as a whole.

<sup>96</sup> You have *not* failed to add to the inheritance of the Sons of God
and thus have not failed to secure it for yourselves. If it was the Will
of God to give it to you, He gave it forever. If it was His Will that
you have it forever, He gave you the means for keeping it, *and you have
done so*. Disobeying God's Will is meaningful only to the insane. In
truth it is impossible. Your self-fullness is as boundless as God's.
Like His, it extends forever and in perfect peace. Its radiance is so
intense that it creates in perfect joy, and only the whole can be born
of its wholeness.

<sup>97</sup> Be confident that you have never lost your identity and the
extensions which maintain it in wholeness and peace. Miracles are an
*expression* of this confidence. They are reflections both of your own
proper identification with your brothers and of your own awareness that
your identification *is* maintained by extension. The miracle is a
*lesson in total perception*. By including *any* part of totality in the
lesson, you *have* included the whole. You have said that when you write
of the Kingdom and your creations which belong in it, you are describing
*what you do not know.* That is true in a sense, but no more true than
your failure to acknowledge the whole result of the ego's premises. The
Kingdom is the result of premises, just as this world is.

<sup>98</sup> You *have* carried the ego's reasoning to its logical conclusion,
which is *total confusion about everything*. Yet you do not really
*believe* this, or you could not possibly maintain it. If you really saw
this result, you could not *want* it. The only reason why you could
possibly want *any* part of it is because you do *not* see the whole of
it. You \[therefore\] are willing to look at the ego's premises but
*not* at their logical outcome. Is it not possible that you have done
the same thing with the premises of God?

<sup>99</sup> Your creations *are* the logical outcome of His premises. *His*
thinking has established them *for* you. They are therefore there,
*exactly* where they belong. They belong in your mind as part of your
identification with His, but your state of mind and your recognition of
what is *in* your mind depend at any given moment on what you believe
*about* your mind. Whatever these beliefs may be, they are the premises
which will determine what you accept *into* your mind. It is surely
clear that you can both accept into your mind what is not really there
and deny what *is*. Neither of these possibilities requires further
elaboration here, but both are clearly indefensible, even if you elect
to defend them.

<sup>100</sup> Yet the function which God Himself gave your minds through His you
may deny, but you cannot prevent. It is the logical outcome of what you
*are*. The ability to see a logical outcome depends on the *willingness*
to see it, but its truth has nothing to do with your willingness at all.
Truth is *God's* Will. *Share* His Will, and you share what He knows.
*Deny* His Will as yours, and you are denying His Kingdom *and* yours.
The Holy Spirit will direct you only so as to avoid pain. The undoing of
pain must obviously avoid pain. Surely no one would object to this goal
*if he recognized it*. The problem is not whether what the Holy Spirit
says is true, but whether you want to *listen* to what He says.

