---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: The Recognition of Truth
ref: Tx.7.V
---

<sup>26</sup> God's meaning waits in the Kingdom, because that is where He placed
it. It does not wait in time. It merely *rests* in the Kingdom, because
it *belongs* there, as you do. How can you, who *are* God's meaning,
perceive yourselves as absent *from* it? You can see yourselves as
separated from your meaning only *by experiencing yourself as unreal*.
This is why the ego is insane; it teaches that you are *not* what you
*are.* This is so contradictory that it is clearly impossible. It is
therefore a lesson which you *cannot really learn*, and therefore
*cannot really teach*. Yet you are always teaching. You *must* therefore
be teaching something *else* as well, even though the ego *does not know
what it is*.

<sup>27</sup> The ego, then, *is* always being undone and *does* suspect your
motives. Your mind *cannot* be unified in allegiance to the ego, because
the mind does *not* belong to it. Yet what is “treacherous” to the ego
*is* faithful to peace. The ego's “enemy” is therefore *your* friend. We
said before that the ego's friend is not part of you, since the ego
perceives itself as at war and therefore in need of allies. *You* who
are *not* at war must look for brothers and *recognize* all whom you see
*as* brothers, because *only* equals are at peace.

<sup>28</sup> Because God's equal Sons have everything, they *cannot* compete. Yet
if they perceive *any* of their brothers as anything other than their
perfect equals, the idea of competition *has* entered their minds. Do
not underestimate your need to be vigilant *against* this idea, because
*all* your conflicts come from it. It is the belief that conflicting
interests are possible, and therefore you have accepted the impossible
as *true*. How is that different from saying that you are perceiving
*yourself* as unreal?

<sup>29</sup> To be *in* the Kingdom is merely to focus your full attention *on*
it. As long as you believe that you can attend to what is not true, you
are accepting conflict as your *choice*. Is it *really* a choice? It
*seems* to be, but seeming and reality are hardly the same. You who
*are* the Kingdom are not concerned with seeming. Reality is yours,
because you *are* reality. This is how having and being are ultimately
reconciled, not in the Kingdom, but *in your minds*. The altar there is
the *only* reality. The altar is perfectly clear in thought, because it
is a reflection of *perfect* Thought. It sees only brothers, because it
sees *only* in its own light.

<sup>30</sup> God has lit your minds Himself and keeps your minds lit by His light,
because His light is what your minds *are*. This is *totally* beyond
question, and when you questioned it you *were* answered. The answer
merely *undoes* the question by establishing the fact that to question
reality is to question meaninglessly. That is why the Holy Spirit
*never* questions. His sole function is to *undo* the questionable and
thus lead to *certainty*. The certain are perfectly calm, because they
are not in doubt. They do not raise questions, because nothing
questionable *enters* their minds. This holds them in perfect serenity,
because this is what they share, *knowing* what they are.

<sup>31</sup> As has so often been said, healing is both an art and a science. It
is an art, because it depends on inspiration in the sense that we have
already used the term. Inspiration is the opposite of dispiriting and
therefore means to make joyous. The dispirited are depressed, because
they believe that they are literally “without the Spirit,” which is an
illusion. You do not *put* the Spirit in them by inspiring them, because
that would be magic and therefore would not be real healing. You *do*,
however, recognize the Spirit that is *already* there and thereby
*reawaken* it. This is why the healer is part of the resurrection and
the *life.* The Spirit is not asleep in the minds of the sick, but the
part of the mind that can perceive it and be glad *is*.

<sup>32</sup> Healing is also a science, because it obeys the laws of God, Whose
laws are true. *Because* they are true, they are perfectly dependable
and therefore universal in application. The *real* aim of science is
neither prediction nor control but *only* understanding. This is because
it does *not* establish the laws it seeks, *cannot* discover them
through prediction, and has *no* control over them at all. Science is
nothing more than an approach to *what already is*. Like inspiration it
can be misunderstood as magic and *will* be whenever it is undertaken as
*separate* from what already is and perceived as a means for
*establishing* it. To believe this is possible is to believe *you can do
it*. This can *only* be the voice of the ego.

<sup>33</sup> Truth can only be *recognized* and *need* only be recognized.
Inspiration is of the Spirit, and certainty is of God according to His
laws. Both, therefore, come from the same Source, \[because\]
inspiration comes from the Voice *for* God, and certainty comes from the
laws *of* God. Healing does not come *directly* from God, Who knows His
creations as perfectly whole. Yet healing is \[nevertheless\] *of* God,
because it proceeds from His Voice and from His laws. It is their
result, in a state of mind which does *not* know Him. The *state* is
unknown to Him and therefore does not exist, but those who sleep *are*
stupefied, or better, *unaware*. \[*And because*\] they are unaware,
they do *not* know.

<sup>34</sup> The Holy Spirit must work *through* you to teach you He is *in* you.
This is an intermediary step toward the knowledge that you are in God,
because you are part of Him. The miracles which the Holy Spirit inspires
can have no order of difficulty, because every part of creation is of
*one* order. This is God's *Will and yours*. The laws of God *establish*
this, and the Holy Spirit reminds you *of* it. When you heal, you are
*remembering* the laws of God and forgetting the laws of the ego. We
said before that forgetting is merely a way of remembering *better.* It
is therefore *not* the opposite of remembering, when it is properly
perceived. Perceived *improperly*, it induces a perception of *conflict*
with something *else*, as all incorrect perception does. *Properly*
perceived, it can be used as a way *out* of conflict, as all proper
perception can.

<sup>35</sup> *All* abilities, then, should be given over to the Holy Spirit, *Who
knows how to use them properly.* He can use them *only* for healing,
because He knows you *only* as whole. *By* healing you learn of
wholeness, and by learning of wholeness you learn to remember God. You
*have* forgotten Him, but the Holy Spirit still knows that your
forgetting must be translated into a way of *remembering* and *not*
perceived as a separate ability which opposes an opposite. That is the
way in which the ego tries to use *all* abilities, since its goal is
always to make you believe that *you* are in opposition.

<sup>36</sup> The ego's goal is as unified as the Holy Spirit's, and it is because
of this that their goals can *never* be reconciled in *any* way or to
*any* extent. The ego *always* seeks to divide and separate. The Holy
Spirit *always* seeks to unify and heal. As you heal you *are* healed,
because the Holy Spirit sees no order of healing. Healing is the way to
*undo* the belief in differences, being the *only* way of perceiving the
Sonship without this belief. This perception is therefore *in* accord
with the laws of God, even in a state of mind which is *out* of accord
with His. The strength of right perception is so great that it brings
the mind *into* accord with His, because it yields to His pull which is
in all of you.

<sup>37</sup> To *oppose* the pull or the Will of God is not an ability but a real
*delusion*. The ego believes that it *has* this ability and can offer it
to you as a gift. *You do not want it*. It is *not* a gift. It is
*nothing at all*. God has given you a gift which you both have and are.
When you do not use it, you do not know you *have* it. By *not* knowing
this, you do not know what you are. Healing, then, is a way of
*approaching* knowledge by thinking *in accordance* with the laws of God
and recognizing their *universality*. Without this recognition, you have
made the laws themselves meaningless to you. Yet the *laws* are not
meaningless, since all meaning is contained *by* them and *in* them.

<sup>38</sup> Seek ye *first* the Kingdom of Heaven, because that is where the laws
of God operate truly, and they can operate *only* truly since they are
the laws of Truth. But seek this *only* because you can *find* nothing
else. There *is* nothing else. God is all in all in a very literal
sense. All being is in Him who *is* all Being. *You* are therefore in
Him since *your* being *is* His. Healing is a way of forgetting the
sense of danger the ego has induced in *you* by *not* recognizing its
existence in your brothers. This strengthens the Holy Spirit in *both*
of you, because it is a *refusal* to acknowledge fear. Love needs only
this invitation. It comes freely to *all* the Sonship, being what the
Sonship *is*. By your awakening *to* it, you are merely forgetting what
you are *not*. This enables you to remember what you *are*.

