---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: Healing and the Changelessness of Mind
ref: Tx.7.VI
---

<sup>39</sup> The body is nothing more than a framework for developing abilities.
It is therefore a means for developing *potentials*, which is quite
apart from what the potential is used *for*. *That* is a *decision*. The
effects of the ego's decision in this matter are so apparent that they
need no elaboration here, but the Holy Spirit's decision to use the body
*only* for communication has such a direct connection with healing that
it *does* need clarification. The unhealed healer *obviously* does not
understand his own vocation.

<sup>40</sup> *Only* minds communicate. Since the ego *cannot* obliterate the
impulse to communicate because it is also the impulse to create, the ego
can only teach you that the *body* can both communicate *and* create and
therefore does not *need* the mind. The ego thus tries to teach you that
the body can *act* like the mind and is therefore self-sufficient. Yet
we have learned that behavior is *not* the level for either teaching
*or* learning. This must be so, since you *can* act in accordance with
what you do *not* believe. To do this, however, will weaken you as
teachers *and* learners because, as has been repeatedly emphasized, you
teach what you *do* believe. An inconsistent lesson will be poorly
taught *and poorly learned*. If you teach both sickness *and* healing,
you are both a poor teacher *and* a poor learner.

<sup>41</sup> Healing is the one ability which everyone can develop and *must*
develop if he is to be healed. Healing is the Holy Spirit's form of
communication and the *only* one He knows. He recognizes no other,
because He does not accept the ego's confusion of mind and body. Minds
can communicate, but they *cannot* hurt. The body in the service of the
ego can hurt other *bodies*, but this cannot occur unless the body has
*already* been confused with the mind. This fact, too, can be used
either for healing or for magic, but you must remember that magic is
*always* the belief that healing is *harmful*. This is its totally
insane premise, and so it proceeds accordingly.

<sup>42</sup> Healing only *strengthens*. Magic *always* tries to weaken. Healing
perceives *nothing* in the healer that everyone else does not *share*
with him. Magic *always* sees something “special” in the healer which he
believes he can offer as a gift to someone who does *not* have it. He
may believe that the gift comes *from* God to Him, but it is quite
evident that he does not understand God if he thinks he has something
that others \[*do not*\]. You might well ask, then, why some healing
*can* result from this kind of thinking, and there is a reason for this.

<sup>43</sup> However misguided the “magical healer” may be, he is *also* trying to
help. He is conflicted and unstable, but *at times* he is offering
something to the Sonship, and the only thing the Sonship can *accept* is
healing. When the so-called “healing” works, then, the impulse to help
and to *be* helped have coincided. This is coincidental, because the
healer may *not* be experiencing himself as truly helpful at the time,
but the belief that he *is*, in the mind of another, helps *him*.

<sup>44</sup> The Holy Spirit does *not* work by chance, and healing that is of Him
*always* works. Unless the healer *always* heals by Him, the results
*will* vary. Yet healing itself *is* consistence since *only*
consistence is conflict-free, and only the conflict-free *are* whole. By
accepting exceptions and acknowledging that he can sometimes heal and
sometimes not, the healer is *obviously* accepting inconsistency. He is
therefore *in* conflict and *teaching* conflict. Can anything of God
*not* be for all and for always?

<sup>45</sup> Love is incapable of *any* exceptions. Only if there is fear does the
*idea* of exceptions seem to be meaningful. Exceptions are fearful,
because they are made *by* fear. The “fearful healer” is a contradiction
in terms and is therefore a concept which *only* a conflicted mind could
possibly perceive as meaningful. Fear does *not* gladden. Healing
*does*. Fear *always* makes exceptions. Healing *never* does. Fear
produces dissociation, because it induces *separation*. Healing *always*
produces harmony, because it proceeds from integration.

<sup>46</sup> Healing is predictable, because it can be counted on. *Everything*
that is of God can be counted on, because everything of God is wholly
*real*. Healing can be counted on, *because* it is inspired by His Voice
and is in accord with His laws. Yet if healing *is* consistence, it
cannot be inconsistently understood. Understanding *means* consistence
because God means consistence. Since that is *His* meaning, it is also
*yours*. Your meaning cannot *be* out of accord with His because your
whole meaning, and your *only* meaning, comes *from* His and is *like*
His. God cannot be out of accord with *Himself*, and *you* cannot be out
of accord with Him. You cannot separate your *self* from your Creator,
Who created you by sharing *His* being *with* you.

<sup>47</sup> The unhealed healer wants gratitude *from* his brothers, but he is
not grateful *to* them. This is because he thinks he is *giving*
something *to* them and is *not* receiving something equally desirable
in return. His *teaching* is limited, because he is *learning* so
little. His healing lesson is limited by his own ingratitude, which is a
lesson in *sickness*. Learning is constant and so vital in its power for
change that a Son of God can recognize his power in one instant and
change the world in the next. That is because by changing *his* mind he
has changed the most powerful device that was ever created *for* change.

<sup>48</sup> This in no way contradicts the changelessness of mind as *God*
created it, but you think that you *have* changed it as long as you
learn through the ego. This *does* place you in a position of needing to
learn a lesson which seems contradictory—you must learn to change your
mind *about* your mind. Only by this can you learn that it *is*
changeless. When you heal that is exactly what you *are* learning. You
are recognizing the changeless mind in your brother by realizing that he
*could* not have changed his mind. That is how you perceive the Holy
Spirit in him. It is *only* the Holy Spirit in him that never changes
His Mind. He himself must think he *can*, or he would not perceive
himself as sick. He therefore does not know what his self *is*.

<sup>49</sup> If *you* see only the changeless in him, you have not really changed
him at all. By changing *your* mind about his *for* him, you help him
*undo* the change his ego thinks it has made in him. As you can hear two
voices, so you can see in two ways. One way shows you an image, or
better, an idol which you may worship out of fear but which you will
never love. The other shows you only truth, which you will love, because
you will *understand* it. Understanding is *appreciation*, because what
you understand you can *identify* with, and by making it part of *you*,
you have accepted it with love.

<sup>50</sup> That is how God Himself created *you*—in understanding, in
appreciation, and in love. The ego is totally unable to understand this,
because it does *not* understand what it makes; it does *not* appreciate
it; and it does *not* love it. It incorporates to *take away.* It
literally believes that every time it deprives someone of something,
*it* has increased. We have spoken often of the increase of the Kingdom
by *your* creations, which can only be created as *you* were. The whole
glory and perfect joy that *is* the Kingdom lies in you to give. Do you
not *want* to give it?

<sup>51</sup> You *cannot* forget the Father, because I am with you, and *I* cannot
forget Him. To forget *me* is to forget yourself and Him Who created
you. Our brothers *are* forgetful. That is why they need your
remembrance of me and Him who created me. Through this remembrance, you
can change their minds about *themselves*, as I can change *yours.* Your
minds are so powerful a light that you can look into theirs and
enlighten them, as I can enlighten yours. I do not want to share my
*body* in communion, because that is to share nothing. \[Would I try to
share an illusion with the most holy children of a most holy Father?\]
Yet I do want to share my *mind* with you, because we *are* of One Mind
and that Mind *is* ours.

<sup>52</sup> See *only* this mind everywhere, because only this *is* everywhere
and in everything. It *is* everything, because it encompasses all things
within *itself*. Blessed are you who perceive only this, because you
perceive only what is true. Come therefore unto me and learn of the
truth in *you*. The mind we share is shared by all our brothers, and as
we see them truly, they *will* be healed. Let *your* mind shine with
mine upon their minds and by our gratitude to them make them aware of
the light in *them*.

<sup>53</sup> This light will shine back upon *you* and on the whole Sonship,
because this is your proper gift to God. He will accept it and give it
to the Sonship, because it is acceptable to Him and therefore to His
Sons. This is the true communion of the Spirit, Who sees the altar of
God in everyone and, by bringing it to *your* appreciation, calls upon
you to love God *and* His creations. You can appreciate the Sonship
*only* as one. This is part of the Law of Creation and therefore governs
*all* thought.

