---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: From Vigilance to Peace
ref: Tx.7.VII
---

<sup>54</sup> Although you can *love* the Sonship only as one, you can *perceive*
it as fragmented. It is impossible, however, for you to see something in
*part* of it that you will not attribute to *all* of it. That is why
attack is *never* discrete and why attack must be relinquished
*entirely*. If it is *not* relinquished entirely, it is not relinquished
at all. Fear and love are equally reciprocal. They make or create,
depending on whether the ego or the Holy Spirit begets or inspires them,
but they *will* return to the mind of the thinker, and they *will*
affect his total perception. That includes his perception of God, of His
creations, and of his own. He will not appreciate *any* of them if he
regards them fearfully. He will appreciate *all* of them if he regards
them with love.

<sup>55</sup> The mind that accepts attack *cannot* love. That is because it
believes that it can *destroy* love and therefore does not understand
what love *is.* If it does not understand what love is, it *cannot*
perceive itself as loving. This loses the awareness of being, induces
feelings of unreality, and results in utter confusion. Your own thinking
has done this because of its power, but your own thinking can also save
you *from* this, because its power is *not* of your making. Your ability
to *direct* your thinking as you will is *part* of its power. If you do
not believe you can do this, you have *denied* the power of your thought
and thus rendered it powerless in your *belief.*

<sup>56</sup> The ingeniousness of the ego to preserve itself is enormous, but it
stems from the power of the mind, which the ego *denies*. This means
that the ego *attacks* what is *preserving* it, and this *must* be a
source of extreme anxiety. That is why the ego *never* knows what it is
doing. It is perfectly logical but clearly insane. The ego draws upon
the one source which is totally inimical to its existence *for* its
existence. Fearful of perceiving the *power* of this source, it is
forced to depreciate it. This threatens its *own* existence, a state
which it finds intolerable.

<sup>57</sup> Remaining logical but still insane, the ego resolves this completely
insane dilemma in a completely insane way. It does not perceive *its*
existence as threatened by projecting the threat onto *you* and
perceiving your *being* as nonexistent. This ensures *its* continuance
if you side with it by guaranteeing that you will not know your *own*
safety. The ego cannot afford to know *anything*. Knowledge is total,
and the ego does not *believe* in totality. This unbelief is its origin
and, while the ego does not love *you*, it *is* faithful to its own
antecedents, begetting as it was begotten.

<sup>58</sup> Mind *always* reproduces as it was produced. Produced by fear, the
ego reproduces fear. This is its allegiance, and this allegiance makes
it treacherous to love, *because* you are love. Love is your power,
which the ego must deny. It must also deny everything which this power
gives you, because it gives you *everything*. No one who has everything
*wants* the ego. Its own maker, then, does not want it. Rejection is
therefore the only decision which the ego could possibly encounter, if
the mind which made it knew *itself*. And if it recognized *any* part of
the Sonship, it *would* know itself.

<sup>59</sup> The ego therefore opposes *all* appreciation, *all* recognition,
*all* sane perception, and *all* knowledge. It perceives their threat as
total, because it senses the fact that *all* commitments the mind makes
*are* total. Forced, therefore, to detach itself from you who *are*
mind, it is willing to attach itself to *anything* else. But there *is*
nothing else. It does not follow that the mind cannot make illusions,
but it *does* follow that if it makes illusions it will believe in them,
because that is *how* it made them.

<sup>60</sup> The Holy Spirit undoes illusions without attacking them merely
because He cannot perceive them at all. They therefore do not exist for
Him. He resolves the *apparent* conflict which they engender by
perceiving *conflict* as meaningless. We said before that the Holy
Spirit perceives the conflict exactly as it is, and it *is* meaningless.
The Holy Spirit does not want you to *understand* conflict; He wants you
to realize that, *because* conflict is meaningless, it cannot *be*
understood. We have already said that understanding brings appreciation,
and appreciation brings love. Nothing else *can* *be* understood,
because nothing else is *real*, and therefore nothing else *has*
meaning.

<sup>61</sup> If you will keep in mind what the Holy Spirit offers you, you cannot
be vigilant for anything *but* God and His Kingdom. The only reason you
find this difficult is because you think there *is* something else.
Belief does not require vigilance *unless* it is conflicted. If it is,
there *are* conflicting components within it which have engendered a
state of war, and vigilance therefore has become essential. Vigilance
has no place at all in peace. It is necessary against beliefs which are
*not* true and would never have been called upon by the Holy Spirit if
you had *not* believed the untrue. You cannot deny that, when you
believe something, you have *made* it true for *you*.

<sup>62</sup> When you believe what God does not *know*, your thought seems to
*contradict* His, and this makes it appear *as if* you are attacking
Him. We have repeatedly emphasized that the ego *does* believe it can
attack God and tries to persuade you that *you* have done this. If the
mind *cannot* attack, the ego proceeds perfectly logically to the
position that you cannot *be* mind. By not seeing you as you *are*, it
can see *itself* as it *wants* to be. Aware of its weakness, the ego
wants your allegiance, but not as you really are. The ego therefore
wants to engage your mind in its *own* delusional system, because
otherwise the light of *your* understanding would dispel it.

<sup>63</sup> The ego wants no part of truth, because the truth is that the *ego*
is not true. *If* truth is total, the untrue *cannot* exist. Commitment
to either must be *total*, since they cannot coexist in your minds
*without* splitting them. If they cannot coexist in peace and if you
*want* peace, you must give up the idea of conflict *entirely* and for
*all* *time.* \[This requires vigilance *only* as long as *you do not
recognize what is true*.\] While you believe that two totally
contradictory thought systems *share* truth, your need for vigilance is
apparent. Your minds *are* dividing their allegiance between two
kingdoms, and you are totally committed to neither.

<sup>64</sup> Your identification with the Kingdom is totally beyond question,
except by you when you are thinking insanely. What you are is not
established by your perception and is not influenced *by* it at all. All
perceived problems in identification at any level are *not* problems of
fact. They are problems of *understanding*, since they *mean* that you
believe what you can understand *is* up to you to decide. The ego
believes this totally, being *fully* committed to it. It is not true.
The ego therefore is totally committed to untruth, perceiving in total
contradiction to the Holy Spirit and to the knowledge of God.

<sup>65</sup> You can be perceived with meaning *only* by the Holy Spirit, because
your being *is* the knowledge of God. Any belief that you accept which
is apart from this will obscure God's Voice in you and will therefore
obscure God *to* you. Unless you perceive His creation truly, you cannot
know the Creator, since God and His creation are not separate. The
Oneness of the Creator and the creation is your wholeness, your sanity,
and your limitless power. This limitless power is God's gift to you,
because it is what you *are.* If you dissociate your mind from it, you
are perceiving the most powerful force in the universe \[of thought\] as
if it were weak, because you do not believe *you* are part of it.

<sup>66</sup> Perceived *without* your part in it, God's creation *is* perceived as
weak, and those who see themselves as weakened *do* attack. The attack
must be blind, however, because there is nothing *to* attack. Therefore,
they make up images, perceive them as unworthy, and attack them for
their unworthiness. That is all the world of the ego is—*nothing*. It
has no meaning. It does not exist. Do not try to understand it, because
if you do, you are believing that it can *be* understood and is
therefore capable of being appreciated and loved. That would justify it,
and it cannot *be* justified. You cannot make the meaningless
meaningful. This can *only* be an insane attempt.

<sup>67</sup> Allowing insanity to enter your minds means that you have not judged
sanity as *wholly desirable.* If you *want* something else, you will
*make* something else, but because it *is* something else, it will
attack your thought system and divide your allegiance. You cannot create
in this divided state, and you must be vigilant *against* this divided
state, because only peace can *be* extended. Your divided minds are
blocking the extension of the Kingdom, and its extension *is* your joy.
If you do not extend the Kingdom, you are not thinking with your Creator
and creating as He created.

<sup>68</sup> In this depressing state, the Holy Spirit reminds you gently that you
are sad because you are not fulfilling your function as co-creators with
God and are therefore depriving yourselves of joy. This is not God's
Will but *yours*. If your will is out of accord with God's, you are
willing without meaning. Yet because God's Will is unchangeable, no
*real* conflict of will is possible. This is the Holy Spirit's perfectly
consistent teaching.

<sup>69</sup> Creation, *not* separation, is your will *because* it is God's, and
nothing that opposes this means anything at all. Being a perfect
accomplishment, the Sonship can only accomplish perfectly, extending the
joy in which it was created and identifying itself with both its Creator
and its creations, *knowing* they are one.

