---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: The Confusion of Strength and Weakness
ref: Tx.7.XI
---

<sup>101</sup> You no more recognize what is painful than you know what is joyful
and are in fact very apt to confuse the two. The Holy Spirit's main
function is to teach you *to tell them apart*. However strange it may
seem that this is necessary, it obviously *is.* The reason is equally
obvious. What is joyful to you *is* painful to the ego and, as long as
you are in doubt about what *you* are, you will be confused about joy
and pain. This confusion is the cause of the whole idea of sacrifice.
Obey the Holy Spirit, and you *will* be giving up the ego. But you will
be sacrificing *nothing*. On the contrary, you will be gaining
*everything.* If you believed this, there would *be* no conflict.

<sup>102</sup> That is why you need to *demonstrate* the obvious to yourself. It is
*not* obvious to you. You believe that doing the *opposite* of God's
Will can be better for you. You also believe that it is possible to *do*
the opposite of God's Will. Therefore, you believe that an impossible
choice is open to you and one which is both very fearful *and* very
desirable. Yet God *wills.* He does *not* wish. *Your* will is as
powerful as His because it *is* His. The ego's wishes do not mean
anything, because the ego wishes for the impossible. You can *wish* for
the impossible, but you can *will* only with God. This is the ego's
weakness and *your* strength.

<sup>103</sup> The Holy Spirit *always* sides with you and with your strength. As
long as you avoid His guidance in any way, you *want* to be weak. Yet
weakness *is* frightening. What else, then, can this decision mean
except that you *want* to be fearful? The Holy Spirit *never* asks for
sacrifice, but the ego *always* does. When you are confused about this
*very* clear distinction in motivation, it can *only* be due to
projection. Projection of this kind *is* a confusion in motivation and,
*given* this confusion, trust becomes impossible.

<sup>104</sup> No one obeys gladly a guide he does not trust, but this does not
mean that the *guide* is untrustworthy. In this case, it *always* means
that the *follower* is. However, this too is merely a matter of his own
belief. Believing that *he* can betray, he believes that everything can
betray *him*. Yet this is only because he has *elected to follow false
guidance*. Unable to follow this guidance *without* fear, he associates
fear *with* guidance and refuses to follow *any* guidance at all. \[If
the result of this decision is confusion, this is hardly surprising.\]
The Holy Spirit is perfectly trustworthy, as *you* are. God Himself
trusts you, and therefore your trustworthiness *is* beyond question. It
will always remain beyond question, however much *you* may question it.

<sup>105</sup> We said before that you *are* the Will of God. His Will is not an
idle wish, and your identification *with* His Will is not optional,
since it *is* what you are. Sharing His Will with me is not really open
to choice, though it may seem to be. The whole separation lies in this
fallacy. The only way *out* of the fallacy is to decide that you do not
have to decide *anything*. Everything has been given you by God's
decision. That *is* His Will, and you can *not* undo it. Even the
relinquishment of your false decision-making prerogative, which the ego
guards so jealously, is not accomplished by your wish. It was
accomplished *for* you by the Will of God, Who has not left you
comfortless. His Voice *will* teach you how to distinguish between pain
and joy and *will* lead you out of the confusion which you have made.
There *is* no confusion in the mind of a Son of God whose will *must* be
the Will of the Father, because the Father's Will *is* His Son.

<sup>106</sup> Miracles are *in accord* with the Will of God Whose Will you do not
know, because you are confused about what *you* will. This means that
you are confused about what you are. If you *are* God's Will and do not
*accept* His Will\[, you can *only* be not accepting what you are. But
if your joy *is* what you are\], you are denying joy. The miracle is
therefore a lesson in *what joy is.* Being a lesson in sharing, it is a
lesson in love, which *is* joy. Every miracle is thus a lesson in truth,
and by offering truth you are learning the difference between pain and
joy.

