---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: The State of Grace
ref: Tx.7.XII
---

<sup>107</sup> The Holy Spirit will *always* guide you truly, because *your* joy is
*His*. This is His Will for everyone, because He speaks for the Kingdom
of God which *is* joy. Following Him is therefore the easiest thing in
the world and the only thing that *is* easy, because it is not of the
world and is therefore *natural.* The world *goes against* your nature,
being out of accord with God's laws. The world perceives orders of
difficulty in everything. This is because the ego perceives nothing as
wholly desirable. By demonstrating to yourselves that there *is* no
order of difficulty in miracles, you will convince yourselves that in
your *natural* state there is no difficulty, because it is a state of
grace.

<sup>108</sup> Grace is the *natural* state of every Son of God. When he is *not*
in a state of grace, he is out of his natural environment and does not
function well. Everything he does becomes a strain, because he was not
created for the environment that he has made. He therefore *cannot*
adapt to it, nor can he adapt *it* to *him*. There is no point in
trying. A Son of God is happy *only* when he knows he is with God. That
is the only environment in which he will not experience strain, because
that is where he belongs. It is also the only environment that is worthy
of him, because his own worth is beyond anything he can make.

<sup>109</sup> Consider the kingdom *you* have made and judge its worth fairly. Is
it worthy to be a home for a Child of God? Does it protect his peace and
shine love upon him? Does it keep his heart untouched by fear and allow
him to give always without any sense of loss? Does it teach him that
this giving *is* his joy and that God Himself thanks him for his giving?
That is the *only* environment in which you can be happy. You cannot
make it any more than you can make yourselves. It has been created *for*
you, as you were created for it. God watches over His Children and
denies them nothing. Yet when they deny Him, they do not know this,
because they deny *themselves* everything.

<sup>110</sup> You who could give the love of God to everything you see and touch
and remember are literally denying Heaven to yourselves. I call upon you
again to remember that I have chosen you to teach the Kingdom *to* the
Kingdom. There are no exceptions to this lesson, because the lack of
exceptions *is* the lesson. Every Son who returns to the Kingdom with
this lesson in his heart has healed the Sonship and given thanks to God.
Everyone who learns this lesson has become the perfect teacher, because
he has learned it of the Holy Spirit, Who wants to teach him everything
He knows. When a mind *has* only light, it *knows* only light. Its own
radiance shines all around it and extends out into the darkness of other
minds, transforming them into majesty.

<sup>111</sup> The Majesty of God is there for you to recognize and appreciate and
*know.* Perceiving the Majesty of God *as* your brother is to accept
your *own* inheritance. God gives only equally. If you recognize His
gift in anyone else, you have acknowledged what He has given *you*.
Nothing is as easy to perceive as truth. This is the perception which is
immediate, clear, and natural. You have trained yourselves *not* to see
it, and this has been very difficult for you. *Out* of your natural
environment, you may well ask, “What is truth?” since truth *is* the
environment by which and for which you were created.

<sup>112</sup> You do not know yourselves, because you do not know *your* Creator.
You do not know your creations, because you do not know your brothers,
who created them *with* you. We said before that only the whole Sonship
is worthy to be co-creator with God, because only the whole Sonship can
create *like* Him. Whenever you heal a brother by recognizing his worth,
you are acknowledging *his* power to create *and yours.* He cannot have
lost what *you* recognize, and *you* must have the glory you see in him.
He is a co-creator with God with *you*. Deny *his* creative power, and
you are denying yours *and that of God, Who created you.* You cannot
deny part of truth. You do not know your creations, because you do not
know their creator. You do not know yourselves, because you do not know
*yours*.

<sup>113</sup> Your creations cannot establish your reality any more than you can
establish God's. But you can *know* both. Being is known by sharing.
*Because* God shared His Being with you, you can know Him. But you must
also know all He created to know what *they* have shared. Without your
Father, you will not know your fatherhood. The Kingdom of God includes
all His Sons and their children, who are like the Sons as they are like
the Father. Know then the Sons of God, and you will know *all* creation.

