---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: Introduction
ref: Tx.7.I
---

The creative power of both God and His creations is limitless, but they
are not in reciprocal relationship. You *do* communicate fully with God,
as He does with you. This is an ongoing process in which you share, and
*because* you share it, you are inspired to create *like* God. Yet in
creation you are not in reciprocal relation to God, since He created
*you*, but you did *not* create Him. We have already said that only in
this respect your creative power differs from His. Even in this world
there is a parallel. Parents give birth to children, but children do not
give birth to parents. They *do*, however, give birth to *their*
children and thus give birth *as* their parents do.

<sup>2</sup> If you created God and He created you, the Kingdom could not increase
through its own creative thought. Creation would therefore be limited,
and you would not be co-creators with God. As God's creative Thought
proceeds from Him to you, so must your creative thought proceed from you
to *your* creations. Only in this way can all creative power extend
outward. God's accomplishments are not yours. But yours are *like* His.
*He* created the Sonship, and you *increase* it. You have the power to
*add* to the Kingdom, but not to add to the *Creator* of the Kingdom.
You claim this power when you become vigilant only for God and His
Kingdom. *By accepting* this power as yours, you have learned to be what
you are.

<sup>3</sup> Your creations belong in you, as you belong in God. You are part of
God, as your sons are part of His Sons. To create is to love. Love
extends outward simply because it cannot be contained. Being limitless,
*it does not stop.* It creates forever, but not in time. God's creations
have always been, because *He* has always been. *Your* creations have
always been, because you can create only as God creates. Eternity is
yours, because He created you eternal.

