---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: The Laws of Mind
ref: Tx.7.III
---

<sup>10</sup> To heal, then, is to correct perception in your brother *and*
yourself by sharing the Holy Spirit with him. This places you *both*
within the Kingdom and restores its wholeness in your minds. This
parallels creation, because it *unifies by increasing* and *integrates
by extending*. What you project you believe. This is an immutable law of
the mind in this world as well as in the Kingdom. However, the content
is different in this world, because the thoughts it governs are very
different from the thoughts in the Kingdom. Laws must be adapted to
circumstances if they are to maintain order.

<sup>11</sup> The outstanding characteristic of the laws of mind as they operate in
this world is that by obeying them—and I assure you that you *must* obey
them—you can arrive at diametrically opposed results. This is because
the laws have adapted to the circumstances of this world, in which
diametrically opposed outcomes *are* believed in. The laws of mind
govern thoughts, and you *do* respond to two conflicting voices. You
have heard many arguments on behalf of “the freedoms,” which would
indeed have been freedom if man had not chosen to *fight* for them. That
is why they perceive “the freedoms” as many instead of as one. Yet the
argument that underlies the defense of freedom is perfectly valid.
Because it is true, it should not be *fought* for, but it *should* be
sided *with*.

<sup>12</sup> Those who are against freedom believe that its outcome will *hurt*
them, which *cannot* be true. But those who are *for* freedom, even if
they are misguided in how \[they\] defend it, are siding with the one
thing in this world which *is* true. Whenever anyone can listen fairly
to both sides of *any* issue, he will make the right decision. This is
because he *has* the answer. Conflict can *seem* to be interpersonal,
but it *must* be intrapersonal first.

<sup>13</sup> The term “intrapersonal” is an ego term, because “personal” implies
“of *one* person” and *not* of others. “Interpersonal” has a similar
error in that it refers to something that exists among different or
*separate* people. When we spoke before of the extremely *personal*
nature of revelation, we followed this statement immediately with a
description of the inevitable outcomes of the revelation in terms of
*sharing*. A person conceives of himself as separate largely because he
perceives *of* himself as bounded by a body. *Only* if he perceives
himself as a *mind* can \[he overcome this\]. Then he is free to use
terms like “intramental” and “intermental” *without* seeing them as
different \[and\] conflicting, because minds *can* be in perfect accord.

<sup>14</sup> *Outside* the Kingdom, the law which prevails *inside* it is adapted
to “what you project you *believe*.” This is its *teaching* form, since
outside the Kingdom teaching is mandatory, because *learning* is
essential. This form of the law clearly implies that you will learn what
*you* are from what you have projected onto others and therefore believe
*they* are. *In* the Kingdom there is no teaching *or* learning, because
there is no *belief*. There is only *certainty.* God and His Sons, in
the surety of being, *know* that what you project you *are*. That form
of the law is not adapted at all, being the law of creation. God Himself
created the law by creating *by* it. And His Sons, who create like Him,
follow it gladly, knowing that the increase of the Kingdom depends on
it, just as their own creation did.

<sup>15</sup> Laws must be communicated if they are to be helpful. In effect, they
must be *translated* for those who speak a different language.
Nevertheless, a good translator, although he must alter the *form* of
what he translates, *never* changes the meaning. In fact, his whole
purpose is to change the form *so that* the original meaning is
retained. The Holy Spirit is the *translator* of the laws of God to
those who do *not* understand them. You could not do this yourselves,
because conflicted minds *cannot* be faithful to one meaning and will
therefore *change the meaning to preserve the form*.

<sup>16</sup> The Holy Spirit's purpose in translating is naturally *exactly* the
opposite. He translates only to *preserve* the original meaning in *all*
respects and in *all* languages. Therefore, He opposes differences in
form as meaningful, emphasizing always that *these differences do not
matter*. The meaning of His message is *always* the same, and *only* the
meaning matters. God's law of Creation in perfect form does not involve
the *use* of truth to convince His Sons *of* truth. The *extension* of
truth, which *is* the law of the Kingdom, rests only on the knowledge of
what truth *is.* This is your inheritance and requires no learning at
all, but when you *dis*inherited yourselves, you *became* learners.

<sup>17</sup> No one questions the intimate connection of learning and memory.
Learning is impossible *without* memory, since it cannot be consistent
*unless* it is remembered. That is why the Holy Spirit *is* a lesson in
remembering. We said before that He teaches remembering and forgetting,
but the forgetting aspect is only *to make the remembering consistent*.
You forget in order to *remember better*. You will *not* understand His
translations while you listen to two ways of perceiving them. Therefore,
you must forget or relinquish one to *understand* the other. This is the
only way you *can* learn consistency so that you can finally *be*
consistent.

<sup>18</sup> What can the perfect consistency of the Kingdom mean to the confused?
It is apparent that confusion *interferes* with meaning and therefore
*prevents the learner from appreciating* it. There is *no* confusion in
the Kingdom, because there is only *one* meaning. This meaning comes
from God and *is* God. Because it is also *you*, you share it and
*extend* it as your Creator did. This needs no translation, because it
is perfectly understood, but it *does* need extension because it *means*
extension. Communication is perfectly direct and perfectly united. It is
totally without strain, because nothing discordant *ever* enters. That
is why it *is* the Kingdom of God. It belongs to Him and is therefore
*like* Him. That is its reality, and nothing *can* assail it.

