---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: Bargaining versus Healing
ref: Tx.7.II
---

<sup>4</sup> The ego demands reciprocal rights because it is competitive rather
than loving. It is always willing to make a “deal,” but it cannot
understand that to be *like* another means that *no* deals are possible.
To gain you must give, not bargain. To bargain is to limit giving, and
this is not God's Will. To will with God is to create like Him. God does
not limit His gifts in any way. *You* are His gifts, and so your gifts
must be like His. Your gifts *to* the Kingdom must be like His gifts to
*you*.

<sup>5</sup> I gave *only* love to the Kingdom because I believed that was what I
*was*. What you believe you are *determines* your gifts, and if God
created you by extending Himself *as* you, you can only extend
*yourself* as He did. Only joy increases forever, since joy and eternity
are inseparable. God extends outward beyond limits and beyond time, and
you who are co-creators with Him extend His Kingdom forever and beyond
limit. Eternity is the indelible stamp of creation. The eternal are in
peace and joy forever.

<sup>6</sup> To think like God is to share His *certainty* of what you are and to
*create* like Him is to share the perfect love He shares with *you*. To
this the Holy Spirit leads you that your joy may be complete, because
the Kingdom of God is whole. We have said that the last step in the
reawakening of knowledge is taken by God. This is true, but it is hard
to explain in words because words are symbols, and nothing that is true
*needs* to be explained. However, the Holy Spirit has the task of
translating the use*less* into the use*ful*, the meaning*less* into the
meaning*ful*, and the temporary into the timeless. He *can* therefore
tell you something about this last step, although this one you must know
yourself, since *by* it you know what you are. This *is* your being.

<sup>7</sup> God does not *take* steps, because His accomplishments are not
gradual. He does not teach, because His creations are changeless. He
does nothing *last*, because He created *first* and *for always*. It
must be understood that the word “first” as applied to Him is *not* a
time concept. He is first in the sense that He is the first in the Holy
Trinity itself. He is the Prime Creator, because He created His
co-creators. *Because* He did, time applies neither to Him *nor* to what
He created. The “last step” that God \[was said to\] take was therefore
true in the beginning, is true now, and will be true forever.

<sup>8</sup> What is timeless is *always* there, because its *being* is eternally
changeless. It does not change by increase, because it was forever
created *to* increase. If you perceive it as *not* increasing, you do
not know what it *is*. You also do not know what created it or Who *He*
is. God does not *reveal* this to you, because it was never hidden. His
light was never obscured, because it is His Will to *share* it. How can
what is fully shared be withheld and *then* revealed?

<sup>9</sup> To heal is the only kind of thinking in this world that resembles the
Thought of God, and because of the elements which they share, can
transfer *to it*. When a brother perceives himself as sick, he is
perceiving himself as *not whole* and therefore *in need.* If you too
see him this way, you are seeing him as if he were absent from the
Kingdom or separated from it, thus making the Kingdom itself obscure to
*both* of you. Sickness and separation are not of God, but the Kingdom
is. If you obscure the Kingdom, you are perceiving what is *not of God*.

