---
chapter: Seven
ctitle: The Consistency of the Kingdom
title: The Defense of Conflict
ref: Tx.7.IX
---

<sup>82</sup> We once said that without projection there can be no anger, but it is
also true that without projection there can be no love. Projection is a
fundamental law of the mind and therefore one which *always* operates.
It is the law by which you create and were created. It is the law which
unifies the Kingdom and keeps it in the Mind of God. To the ego, the law
is perceived as a way of getting *rid* of something it does *not* want.
To the Holy Spirit, it is the fundamental law of sharing by which you
*give* what you value in order to keep it in your *own* mind.

<sup>83</sup> Projection, to the Holy Spirit, is the law of extension. To the ego,
it is the law of deprivation. It therefore produces abundance or
scarcity, depending on how you choose to apply it. This choice *is* up
to you, but it is *not* up to you to decide whether or not you will
*utilize* projection. Every mind *must* project, because that is how it
lives, and every mind *is* life. The ego's use of projection must be
fully understood before its inevitable association between projection
and anger can be finally undone.

<sup>84</sup> The ego *always* tries to preserve conflict. It is very ingenious in
devising ways which *seem* to diminish conflict, because it does *not*
want you to find conflict so intolerable that you will *insist* on
giving it up. Therefore, the ego tries to persuade you that *it* can
free you of conflict, lest you give the *ego* up and free *yourself*.
The ego, using its own warped version of the laws of God, utilizes the
power of the mind *only* to defeat the mind's real purpose. It projects
conflict *from* your mind to *other* minds in an attempt to persuade you
that you have gotten *rid* of it. This has several fallacies which may
not be so apparent.

<sup>85</sup> Strictly speaking, conflict cannot *be* projected, precisely
*because* it cannot be fully shared. Any attempt to keep *part* of it
and get rid of another part does not really mean *anything.* Remember
that a conflicted teacher is a poor teacher *and a poor learner.* His
lessons are confused, and their transfer value is severely limited *by*
his confusion. A second fallacy is the idea that you can get *rid* of
something you do not want by giving it away. *Giving* it is how you
*keep* it. The belief that by giving it *out* you have excluded it from
*within* is a complete distortion of the power of extension.

<sup>86</sup> That is why those who project from the ego are vigilant for their
*own* safety. They *are* afraid that their projections will return and
hurt them. They *do* believe they have blotted their projections from
their *own* minds, but they also believe their projections are trying to
creep back *into* them. That is because the projections have *not* left
their minds, and this in turn forces them to engage in compulsive
activity in order *not* to recognize this. You *cannot* perpetuate an
illusion about another *without* perpetuating it about yourself. There
is no way out of this, because it is *impossible* to fragment the mind.

<sup>87</sup> To fragment is to break into pieces, and mind *cannot* attack or *be*
attacked. The belief that it *can*, a fallacy which the ego *always*
makes, underlies its whole use of projection. It does not understand
what mind *is* and therefore does not understand what *you* are. Yet its
existence is dependent on your mind, because the ego *is* your belief.
The ego is therefore a confusion in identification which never had a
consistent model and never developed consistently. It is the distorted
product of the misapplication of the laws of God by distorted minds
which are misusing their own power.

<sup>88</sup> *Do not be afraid of the ego*. It *does* depend on your mind and, as
you made it by believing in it, so you can dispel it by withdrawing
belief *from* it. Do not project the responsibility for your belief in
it onto anyone *else*, or you will *preserve* the belief. When you are
willing to accept sole responsibility for the ego's existence
*yourself*, you will have laid aside all anger and all attack, because
they *come* from an attempt to project responsibility for your *own*
errors. But having *accepted* the errors as yours, *do not keep them*.
Give them over quickly to the Holy Spirit to be undone completely so
that *all* their effects will vanish from your minds and from the
Sonship *as a whole*.

<sup>89</sup> The Holy Spirit will teach you to perceive *beyond* belief, because
truth *is* beyond belief, and His perception *is* true. The ego can be
completely forgotten at *any* time, because it was always a belief that
is totally incredible. No one can *keep* a belief he has judged to be
unbelievable. The more you learn about the ego, the more you realize
that it cannot *be* believed. The incredible cannot be understood,
because it *is* unbelievable. The utter meaninglessness of all
perception that comes from the unbelievable must be apparent, but it is
not *recognized* as beyond belief, because it was made *by* belief.

<sup>90</sup> The whole purpose of this course is to teach you that the ego is
unbelievable and will forever *be* unbelievable. You who made the ego by
believing the unbelievable cannot make this judgment alone. By accepting
the Atonement for *yourself*, you are deciding against the belief that
you can *be* alone, thus dispelling the idea of separation and affirming
your true identification with the whole Kingdom as literally *part* of
you. This identification is as beyond doubt as it is beyond belief. Your
wholeness has no limits, because being is in infinity.

