---
chapter: Sixteen
ctitle: The Forgiveness of Illusions
title: The Bridge to the Real World
ref: Tx.16.VII
---

<sup>59</sup> The search for the special relationship is the sign that you equate
yourself with the ego and not with God. For the special relationship has
value *only* to the ego. To the ego *unless* a relationship has special
value, it has *no* meaning, and it perceives *all* love as special. Yet
this *cannot* be natural, for it is unlike the relationship of God and
His Son, and all relationships that are unlike this one *must* be
unnatural. For God created love as He would have it be and gave it as it
*is*. Love has no meaning except as its Creator defined it by His Will.
It is impossible to define it otherwise and *understand* it.

<sup>60</sup> Love is *freedom*. To look for it by placing yourself in bondage is
to *separate* yourself from it. For the love of God, no longer seek for
union in separation nor for freedom in bondage! As you release, so will
you be released. Forget this not, or love will be unable to find you and
comfort you. There is a way in which the Holy Spirit asks your help if
you would have His. The holy instant is His most helpful tool in
protecting you from the attraction of guilt, the real lure in the
special relationship. You do not recognize that this *is* its real
appeal, for the ego has taught you that *freedom* lies in it. Yet the
closer you look at the special relationship, the more apparent it
becomes that it *must* foster guilt and therefore *must* imprison.

<sup>61</sup> The special relationship is totally without meaning without a body.
And if you value it, you must *also* value the body. And what you value,
you *will* keep. The special relationship is a device for limiting
*your* self to a body and for limiting your perception of others to
*theirs*. The Great Rays would establish the total *lack* of value of
the special relationship if they were seen. For in seeing them, the body
would disappear because its *value* would be lost. And so your whole
investment in seeing it would be withdrawn from it. You see the world
you *value*.

<sup>62</sup> On this side of the bridge, you see the world of separate bodies
seeking to join each other in separate unions and to become one by
losing. When *two* individuals seek to become one, they are trying to
*decrease* their magnitude. Each would deny his power, for the
*separate* union excludes the universe. Far more is left outside than
would be taken in. For God is left without and *nothing* taken in. If
*one* such union were made in perfect faith, the universe *would* enter
into it. Yet the special relationship which the ego seeks does not
include even one whole individual. For the ego wants but *part* of him
and sees *only* this part and nothing else.

<sup>63</sup> Across the bridge, it is so different! For a time the body is still
seen but not exclusively, as it is seen here. For the little spark which
holds the Great Rays within it is *also* visible, and this spark cannot
be limited long to littleness. Once you have crossed the bridge, the
value of the body is so diminished in your sight that you will see no
need at all to magnify it. For you will realize that the only value
which the body has is to enable you to bring your brothers to the bridge
*with* you and to be released *together* there.

<sup>64</sup> The bridge itself is nothing more than a transition in your
perspective of reality. On this side, everything you see is grossly
distorted and completely out of perspective. What is little and
insignificant is magnified, and what is strong and powerful cut down to
littleness. In the transition there is a period of confusion in which a
sense of actual disorientation seems to occur. But fear it not, for it
means nothing more than that you have been willing to let go your hold
on the distorted frame of reference which seemed to hold your world
together. This frame of reference is built around the special
relationship. *Without* this illusion, there can *be* no meaning you
would still seek here.

<sup>65</sup> Fear not that you will be abruptly lifted up and hurled into reality.
Time is kind, and if you use it *for* reality, it will keep gentle pace
with you in your transition. The urgency is only in dislodging your
minds from their fixed position here. This will not leave you homeless
and without a frame of reference. The period of disorientation which
precedes the actual transition is far shorter than the time it took to
fix your minds so firmly on illusions. Delay will hurt you now more than
before only because you realize it *is* delay and that escape from pain
is really possible. Find hope and comfort rather than despair in this:
You could no longer find even the *illusion* of love in any special
relationship here. For you are no longer wholly insane, and you would
recognize the guilt of self-betrayal for what it *is*.

<sup>66</sup> Nothing you seek to strengthen in the special relationship is
*really* part of you. And you cannot keep part of the thought system
which taught you it was real and understand the Thought that *really*
knows what you are. You *have* allowed the Thought of your reality to
enter your minds, and because you invited it, it *will* abide with you.
Your love for it will not allow you to betray yourself, and you could
not enter into a relationship where it could not go with you, for you
would not *be* apart from it.

<sup>67</sup> Be glad you have escaped the mockery of salvation which the ego
offered you and look not back with longing on the travesty it made of
your relationships. Now no one need suffer, for you have come too far to
yield to the illusion of the beauty and holiness of guilt. Only the
wholly insane could look on death and suffering, sickness and despair
and see it thus. What guilt has wrought is ugly, fearful, and very
dangerous. See no illusion of truth and beauty there. And be you
thankful that there *is* a place where truth and beauty wait for you. Go
on to meet them gladly, and learn how much awaits you for the simple
willingness to give up nothing *because* it is nothing.

<sup>68</sup> The new perspective you will gain from crossing over will be the
understanding of where Heaven *is*. From here it seems to be outside and
across the bridge. Yet as you cross to join it, it will join with *you*
and become one with you. And you will think in glad astonishment that
for all this you gave up *nothing*! The joy of Heaven, which has no
limit, is increased with each light that returns to take its rightful
place within it. Wait no longer, for the love of God and *you*. And may
the holy instant speed you on the way, as it will surely do if you but
let it come to you.

<sup>69</sup> The Holy Spirit asks only this little help of you. Whenever your
thoughts wander to a special relationship which still attracts you,
enter with Him into a holy instant and there let Him release you. He
needs only your willingness to *share* His perspective to give it to you
completely. And your willingness need not be complete because *His* is
perfect. It is His task to atone for your unwillingness by His perfect
faith, and it is His faith you share with Him there. Out of your
recognition of your unwillingness for your release, His *perfect*
willingness is given you. Call upon Him, for Heaven is at His call. And
*let* Him call on Heaven *for* you.

