---
chapter: Sixteen
ctitle: The Forgiveness of Illusions
title: True Empathy
ref: Tx.16.II
---

<sup>5</sup> True empathy is of Him Who knows what it *is*. You will learn His
interpretation of it if you let Him use your capacity for *strength* and
*not* for weakness. He will not desert you, but be sure that *you*
desert not *him*. Humility is strength in this sense only—to recognize
and accept the fact that you do *not* know is to recognize and accept
the fact that He *does* know. You are not sure that He will do His part
because you have never yet done *yours* completely. You will not know
how to respond to what you do not understand. Be tempted not in this,
and yield not to the ego's triumphant use of empathy for *its* glory.

<sup>6</sup> The triumph of weakness is not what you would offer to a brother. And
yet you know no triumph *but* this. This is not knowledge, and the form
of empathy that would bring this about is so distorted that it would
imprison what it would release. The unredeemed cannot redeem, yet they
*have* a Redeemer. Attempt to teach Him not. *You* are the learner; He
the Teacher. Do not confuse your role with His, for this will never
bring peace to anyone. Offer your empathy to Him, for it is *His*
perception and *His* strength that you would share. And let Him offer
you His strength and His perception to be shared through you.

<sup>7</sup> The meaning of love is lost in any relationship which looks to
weakness and hopes to find love there. The power of love, which *is* its
meaning, lies in the strength of God, which hovers over it and blesses
it silently by enveloping it in healing wings. *Let* this be, and do not
try to substitute *your* “miracle” for this. We once said that if a
brother asks a foolish thing of you, to do it. But be certain that this
does not mean to do a foolish thing that would hurt either him *or* you,
for what would hurt one *will* hurt the other. Foolish requests are
foolish for the simple reason that they conflict because they contain an
element of specialness. Only the Holy Spirit recognizes foolish needs as
well as real ones. And He will teach you how to meet both without losing
either.

<sup>8</sup> *You* will attempt to do this only in secrecy. And you will think
that, by meeting the needs of one, you do not jeopardize another because
you keep them separate and secret from each other. That is not the way,
for it leads not to light and truth. No needs will long be left unmet if
you leave them all to Him Whose *function* is to meet them. That is
*His* function and *not* yours. He will not meet them secretly, for He
would share everything you give through Him. And that is *why* He gives
it.

<sup>9</sup> What you give through Him is for the whole Sonship, *not* for part of
it. Leave Him His function, for He will fulfill it if you but ask Him to
enter your relationships and bless them *for* you.

