---
chapter: Sixteen
ctitle: The Forgiveness of Illusions
title: The End of Illusions
ref: Tx.16.VIII
---

<sup>70</sup> It is impossible to let the past go without relinquishing the special
relationship. For the special relationship is an attempt to *reenact*
the past and *change* it. Imagined slights, remembered pain, past
disappointments, perceived injustices, and deprivations all enter into
the special relationship, which becomes a way in which you seek to
restore your wounded self-esteem. What basis would you have for choosing
a special partner *without* the past? Every such choice is made because
of something “evil” in the past to which you cling and for which must
someone else atone.

<sup>71</sup> The special relationship *takes vengeance* on the past. By seeking to
remove suffering in the past, it *overlooks* the present in its
preoccupation with the past and its total commitment to it. *No* special
relationship is experienced in the present. Shades of the past envelop
it and make it what it is. It *has* no meaning in the present, and if it
means nothing *now*, it cannot have any real meaning at all. How can you
change the past *except* in fantasy? And who can give you what you think
the past deprived you of? The past is nothing. Do not seek to lay the
blame for deprivation on it, for the past is gone. You cannot really
*not* let go what has *already* gone. It must be, therefore, that you
are maintaining the illusion that it has *not* gone because you think it
serves some purpose that you want *fulfilled*. And it must also be that
this purpose could *not* be fulfilled in the present, but *only* in the
past.

<sup>72</sup> Do not underestimate the intensity of the ego's drive for vengeance
on the past. It is completely savage and completely insane. For the ego
remembers everything that you have done which offended it and seeks
retribution of *you*. The fantasies it brings to the special
relationships it chooses in which to act out its hate are fantasies of
*your* destruction. For the ego holds the past *against* you, and in
your *escape* from the past, it sees itself deprived of the vengeance it
believes that you so justly merit. Yet without your alliance in your own
destruction, the ego could not hold you to the past.

<sup>73</sup> In the special relationship, you are *allowing* your destruction to
be. That this is insane is obvious. But what is less obvious to you is
that the *present* is useless to you while you pursue the ego's goal as
its ally. The past is gone; seek not to preserve it in the special
relationship, which binds you to it and would teach you that salvation
is past and that you must return *to* the past to find salvation. There
is no fantasy which does not contain the dream of retribution for the
past. Would you act out the dream or let it go?

<sup>74</sup> In the special relationship, it does not *seem* to be an acting out
of vengeance which you seek. And even when the hatred and the savagery
break briefly through into awareness, the illusion of love is not
profoundly shaken. Yet the one thing which the ego never allows to reach
awareness is that the special relationship is the acting out of
vengeance on *yourself*. But what else *could* it be? In seeking the
special relationship, you look not for glory in *yourself*. You have
denied that it is *there*, and the relationship becomes your
*substitute* for it. And vengeance becomes your substitute for
Atonement, and the *escape* from vengeance becomes your *loss*.

<sup>75</sup> Against the ego's insane notion of salvation, the Holy Spirit gently
lays the holy instant. We said before that the Holy Spirit must teach
through comparisons and uses opposites to point to truth. The holy
instant is the *opposite* of the ego's fixed belief in salvation through
vengeance for the past. In the holy instant, it is accepted that the
past is gone, and with its passing the drive for vengeance has been
uprooted and has disappeared. The stillness and the peace of *now*
enfolds you in perfect gentleness. Everything is gone except the truth.

<sup>76</sup> For a time you may attempt to bring illusions into the holy instant
to hinder your full awareness of the *complete* difference in all
respects between your experience of truth and illusion. Yet you will not
attempt this long. In the holy instant, the power of the Holy Spirit
will prevail because you *joined* Him. The illusions you bring with you
will weaken the experience of Him for a while and will prevent you from
keeping the experience in your mind. Yet the holy instant *is* eternal,
and your illusions of time will not prevent the timeless from being what
it is nor you from experiencing it as it is.

<sup>77</sup> What God has given you is truly given and will be truly *received*.
For God's gifts *have* no reality apart from your receiving them. *Your*
receiving completes His *giving*. You will receive *because* it is His
Will to give. He gave the holy instant to be given you, and it is
impossible that you receive it not, *because* He gave it. When He willed
that His Son be free, His Son *was* free. In the holy instant is His
reminder that His Son will always be *exactly* as he was created. And
everything the Holy Spirit teaches you is to remind you that you *have*
received what God has given you.

<sup>78</sup> There is nothing you can hold against reality. All that must be
forgiven are the illusions you have held against your brothers. Their
reality *has* no past, and only illusions can *be* forgiven. God holds
nothing against anyone, for He is incapable of illusions of *any* kind.
Release your brothers from the slavery of their illusions by forgiving
them for the illusions which *you* perceive in them. Thus will you learn
that *you* have been forgiven, for it is *you* who offered them
illusions. In the holy instant, this is done for you *in time* to bring
to you the true condition of Heaven.

<sup>79</sup> Remember that you always choose between truth and illusion—between
the *real* Atonement which would heal and the ego's “atonement” which
would destroy. The power of God and all His Love, without limit, will
support you as you seek only your place in the plan of Atonement arising
from His Love. Be an ally of God and not the ego in seeking how
Atonement can come to you. His help suffices, for His Messenger
understands how to restore the Kingdom to you and to place *all* your
investment in salvation in your relationship with Him.

<sup>80</sup> Seek and *find* his message in the holy instant, where all illusions
are forgiven. From there the miracle extends to bless everyone and to
resolve all problems, be they perceived as great or small, possible or
impossible. There is nothing that will not give place to Him and to His
majesty. To join in close relationship with Him is to accept
relationships as *real* and through their reality to give over all
illusions for the reality of your relationship with God. Praise be to
your relationship with Him and to no other. The truth lies here and
nowhere else. You choose this or *nothing*.

<sup>81</sup> *Forgive us our illusions, Father, and help us to accept our true
relationship with You in which there are no illusions and where none can
ever enter. Our holiness is Yours. What can there be in us that
**needs** forgiveness when Yours is perfect? The sleep of
forgetfulness is only the unwillingness to remember Your forgiveness and
Your Love. Let us not wander into temptation, for the temptation of the
Son of God is not Your will. And let us receive only what **you**
have given and accept but this into the minds which You created and
which You love. Amen*.

