---
chapter: Sixteen
ctitle: The Forgiveness of Illusions
title: Illusion and Reality of Love
ref: Tx.16.V
---

<sup>30</sup> Be not afraid to look upon the special hate relationship, for freedom
lies in looking at it. It would be impossible not to know the meaning of
love except for this. For the special love relationship, in which the
meaning of love is *lost*, is undertaken solely to offset the hate but
*not* to let it go. Your salvation will rise clearly before your open
eyes as you look on this. You cannot *limit* hate. The special love
relationship will not offset it but will merely drive it underground and
out of sight. It is essential to bring it *into* sight and to make no
attempt to hide it. For it is the attempt to balance hate with love that
*makes* love meaningless to you. The extent of the split that lies in
this you do not realize. And *until* you do, the split will remain
unrecognized and therefore unhealed.

<sup>31</sup> The symbols of hate against the symbols of love play out a conflict
which does not exist. For symbols stand for something *else*, and the
symbol of love is without meaning if love is everything. You will go
through this last undoing quite unharmed and will at last emerge as
yourself. This is the last step in the readiness for God. Be not
unwilling now. You are too near, and you will cross the bridge in
perfect safety, translated quietly from war to peace. For the illusion
of love will *never* satisfy, but its reality, which awaits you on the
other side, will give you everything.

<sup>32</sup> The special love relationship is an attempt to limit the destructive
effects of hate by finding a haven in the storm of guilt. It makes no
attempt to rise *above* the storm into the sunlight. On the contrary, it
emphasizes guilt *outside* the haven by attempting to build barricades
against it and keep within them. The special love relationship is not
perceived as a value in itself, but as a place of safety from which
hatred is split off and kept apart. The special love partner is
acceptable only as long as he serves this purpose. Hatred can enter and
indeed is welcome in *some* aspects of the relationship, but it is still
held together by the illusion of love. If the illusion goes, the
relationship is broken or becomes unsatisfying on the grounds of
disillusionment.

<sup>33</sup> Love is *not* an illusion. It is a fact. Where disillusionment is
possible, there was not love but hate. For hate *is* an illusion, and
what can change was *never* love. It is certain that those who select
certain ones as partners in any aspect of living and use them for any
purpose which they would not share with others, are trying to *live*
with guilt rather than *die* of it. This is the choice they see. And
love to them is only an escape from death. They seek it desperately but
not in the peace in which it would gladly come quietly *to* them. And
when they find the fear of death is still upon them, the love
relationship *loses* the illusion that it is what it is not. For then
the barricades against it are broken, fear rushes in, and hatred
triumphs.

<sup>34</sup> There are no triumphs of love. Only hate is concerned with the
“triumph of love” at all. The illusion of love *can* triumph over the
illusion of hate, but always at the price of making *both* illusions. As
long as the illusion of hatred lasts, so long will love be an illusion
to you. And then the only choice which remains possible is which
illusion you prefer. There *is* no conflict in the choice between truth
and illusion. Seen in *these* terms, no one would hesitate. But conflict
enters the instant the choice seems to be one between *illusions*, for
this choice does not matter. Where one choice is as dangerous as the
other, the decision *must* be one of despair.

<sup>35</sup> Your task is not to seek for love but merely to seek and find *all*
of the barriers within yourself which you have built *against* it. It is
not necessary to seek for what is true, but it *is* necessary to seek
for what is false. Every illusion is one of fear, whatever form it
takes. And the attempt to escape from one illusion into another *must*
fail. If you seek love outside yourself, you can be certain that you
perceive hatred within and are *afraid* of it. Yet peace will never come
from the illusion of love, but *only* from its reality.

<sup>36</sup> Recognize this, for it is true, and truth *must* be recognized if it
is to be distinguished from illusion: The special love relationship is
an attempt \[to bring *love into separation*. And, as such, it is
nothing more than an attempt\] to bring love into fear and make it
*real* in fear. In fundamental violation of love's condition, the
special love relationship would accomplish the impossible. How but in
illusion *could* this be done? It is essential that we look very closely
at exactly what it is you think you can do to solve the dilemma, which
seems very real to you, but which does not exist. You have come very
close to truth, and only this stands between you and the bridge that
leads you into it.

<sup>37</sup> Heaven waits silently, and your creations are holding out their hands
to help you cross and welcome them. For it is *they* you *seek*. You
seek but for your own completion, and it is they who render you
complete. The special love relationship is but a shabby substitute for
what makes you whole in truth, *not* in illusion. Your relationship with
them is without guilt, and this enables you to look on all your brothers
with gratitude because your creations were created in union *with* them.
Acceptance of your creations is the acceptance of the oneness of
creation, without which you could never *be* complete. No specialness
can offer you what God has given and what you are joined with Him in
giving.

<sup>38</sup> Across the bridge is your completion, for you will be wholly in God,
willing for nothing special but only to be wholly like unto Him,
completing Him by *your* completion. Fear not to cross to the abode of
peace and perfect holiness. Only there is the completion of God and of
His Son established forever. Seek not for this in the bleak world of
illusion, where nothing is certain, and where everything fails to
satisfy. In the Name of God, be wholly willing to abandon *all*
illusions. In any relationship in which you are wholly willing to accept
completion, and *only* this, there is God completed and His Son with
Him.

<sup>39</sup> The bridge that leads to union in yourself *must* lead to knowledge,
for it was built with God beside you and will lead you straight to Him,
where your completion rests wholly compatible with His. Every illusion
which you accept into your mind by judging it to be attainable removes
your own sense of completion and thus denies the wholeness of your
Father. Every fantasy, be it of love or hate, deprives you of knowledge,
for fantasies are the veil behind which truth is hidden. To lift the
veil which seems so dark and heavy, it is only needful to value truth
beyond *all* fantasy and to be entirely unwilling to settle for illusion
*in place* of truth.

<sup>40</sup> Would you not go *through* fear to love? For such the journey seems
to be. Love calls, but hate would have you stay. Hear not the call of
hate, and see no fantasies\[, for your completion lies in truth and
*nowhere else*\]. See in the call of hate and in every fantasy that
rises to delay you but the call for help which rises ceaselessly from
you to your Creator. Would He not answer you whose completion is His? He
loves you wholly without illusion, as you must love. For love *is*
wholly without illusion and therefore wholly without fear. Whom God
remembers *must* be whole. And God has never forgotten what makes *Him*
whole. In your completion lies the memory of His wholeness and His
gratitude to you for His completion. In His link with you lie both His
inability to forget and your ability to remember. In Him are joined your
willingness to love and all the love of God, Who forgot you not.

<sup>41</sup> Your Father can no more forget the truth in you than you can fail to
remember it. The Holy Spirit is the bridge to Him, made from your
willingness to unite with Him and created by His joy in union with you.
The journey that seemed to be endless is almost complete, for what *is*
endless is very near. You have almost recognized it. Turn with me firmly
away from all illusions *now*, and let nothing stand in the way of
truth. We will take the last foolish journey *away* from truth together,
and then together we go straight to God in joyous answer to His call for
His completion.

<sup>42</sup> If special relationships of any kind would hinder God's completion,
*can* they have value to you? What would interfere with God *must*
interfere with you. Only in time does interference in God's completion
seem to be possible. The bridge that He would carry you across lifts you
from time into eternity. Waken from time and answer fearlessly the call
of Him Who gave eternity to you in your creation. On this side of the
bridge to timelessness you understand nothing. But as you step lightly
across it, upheld *by* timelessness, you are directed straight to the
Heart of God. At its center, and *only* there, you are safe forever
because you are *complete* forever. There is no veil the love of God in
us together cannot lift. The way to truth is open. Follow it with me.

