---
chapter: Sixteen
ctitle: The Forgiveness of Illusions
title: Specialness and Guilt
ref: Tx.16.VI
---

<sup>43</sup> In looking at the special relationship, it is necessary first to
realize that it involves a great amount of pain. Anxiety, despair,
guilt, and attack all enter into it, broken into by periods in which
they *seem* to be gone. All these must be understood for what they are.
Whatever form they take, they are always an attack on the self to make
the *other* guilty. We have spoken of this before, but there are some
aspects of what is really being attempted that we have not touched upon.

<sup>44</sup> Very simply, the attempt to make guilty is *always* directed against
God. For the ego would have you see Him, and Him *alone*, as guilty,
leaving the Sonship open to attack and unprotected from it. The special
love relationship is the ego's chief weapon for keeping you from Heaven.
It does not *appear* to be a weapon, but if you consider *how* you value
it and *why*, you will realize what it must be. The special love
relationship is the ego's most boasted gift, and one which has the most
appeal to those unwilling to relinquish guilt. The “dynamics” of the ego
are clearest here, for counting on the attraction of this offering, the
fantasies which center around it are often quite open. Here they are
usually judged to be acceptable and even natural. No one considers it
bizarre to love and hate together, and even those who believe that hate
is sin merely feel guilty and do not correct it.

<sup>45</sup> This *is* the “natural” condition of the separation, and those who
learn that it is not natural at all seem to be the *unnatural* ones. For
this world *is* the opposite of Heaven, being *made* to be its opposite,
and everything here takes a direction exactly opposite of what is true.
In Heaven, where the meaning of love is known, love is the same as
*union*. Here, where the illusion of love is accepted in love's place,
love is perceived as separation and *exclusion*.

<sup>46</sup> It is in the special relationship, born of the hidden wish for
special love from God, that the ego's hatred triumphs. For the special
relationship is the *renunciation* of the love of God and the attempt to
secure for the self the specialness which He denied. It is essential to
the preservation of the ego that you believe this specialness is not
hell, but Heaven. For the ego would never have you see that separation
can *only* be loss, being the one condition in which Heaven *cannot* be.

<sup>47</sup> To everyone Heaven is completion. There can be no disagreement on
this, because both the ego and the Holy Spirit accept it. They are,
however, in *complete* disagreement on what completion *is* and *how* it
is accomplished. The Holy Spirit knows that completion lies first in
union and then in the extension of union. To the ego, completion lies in
triumph and in the extension of the “victory” even to the final triumph
over God. In this it sees the ultimate freedom of the self, for nothing
would remain to interfere with *it*. This *is* its idea of Heaven. From
this it follows that union, which is a condition in which the ego
*cannot* interfere, *must* be hell.

<sup>48</sup> The special relationship is a strange and unnatural ego device for
joining hell and Heaven and making them indistinguishable. And the
attempt to find the imagined “best” of both worlds has merely led to
fantasies of both and to the inability to perceive either one as it is.
The special relationship is the triumph of this confusion. It is a kind
of union from which union is *excluded*, and the basis for the *attempt*
at union rests on exclusion. What better example could there be of the
ego's maxim, “Seek but do not find?”

<sup>49</sup> Most curious of all is the concept of the self which the ego fosters
in the special relationship. This “self” seeks the relationship to make
itself complete. Yet when it *finds* the special relationship in which
it thinks it can accomplish this, it gives itself *away* and tries to
“trade” itself for the self of another. This is not union, for there is
no increase and no extension. Each partner tries to sacrifice the self
he does not want for one he thinks he would prefer. And he feels guilty
for the “sin” of taking and of giving nothing of value in return. For
how much value *can* he place upon a self that he would give away to get
a better one?

<sup>50</sup> The “better” self the ego seeks is always one that is *more* special.
And whoever seems to possess a special self is “loved” for what can be
taken *from* him. Where both partners see this special self in each
other, the ego sees “a union made in Heaven.” For neither one will
recognize that he has asked for hell, and so he will not interfere with
the ego's illusion of Heaven, which it offered him to *interfere* with
Heaven. Yet if all illusions are of fear, and they *can* be of nothing
else, the illusion of Heaven is nothing more than an “attractive” form
of fear in which the guilt is buried deep and rises in the form of
“love.”

<sup>51</sup> The appeal of hell lies only in the terrible attraction of guilt,
which the ego holds out to those who place their faith in littleness.
The conviction of littleness lies in *every* special relationship, for
only the deprived could *value* specialness. The demand for specialness
and the perception of the giving of specialness as an act of love would
make love *hateful*. And the real purpose of the special relationship,
in strict accordance with the ego's goals, is to destroy reality and
substitute illusion. For the ego is *itself* an illusion, and only
illusions *can* be the witnesses to its “reality.”

<sup>52</sup> If you perceived the special relationship as a triumph over God,
would you *want* it? Let us not think of its fearful nature nor of the
guilt it must entail nor of the sadness and the loneliness. For these
are only attributes of the whole religion of the separation and of the
total context in which it is thought to occur. The central theme in its
litany to sacrifice is that God must die so *you* can live. And it is
this theme which is acted out in the special relationship. Through the
death of *your* self, you think you can attack another self and snatch
it from the other to replace the self which you despise. And you despise
it because you do not think it offers the specialness which you demand.
And *hating* it, you have made it little and unworthy because you are
*afraid* of it.

<sup>53</sup> How can you grant unlimited power to what you think you have
attacked? So fearful has the truth become to you that *unless* it is
weak and little, \[and unworthy of value,\] you would not dare to look
upon it. You think it safer to endow the little self which you have made
with power you *wrested* from truth, triumphing over it and leaving it
helpless. See how *exactly* is this ritual enacted in the special
relationship. An altar is erected in between two separate people on
which each seeks to kill his self and on his body raise another self
which takes its power from his death. Over and over and over this ritual
is enacted. And it is *never* completed nor ever *will* be completed.
For the ritual of completion *cannot* complete, and life arises not from
death, nor Heaven from hell.

<sup>54</sup> Whenever any form of special relationship tempts you to seek for love
in ritual, remember love is *content* and not form of *any* kind. The
special relationship is a *ritual* of form, aimed at the raising of the
form to take the place of God at the *expense* of content. There *is* no
meaning in the form, and there will never be. The special relationship
must be recognized for what it is—a senseless ritual in which strength
is extracted from the death of God and invested in His killer as the
sign that form has triumphed over content and love has lost its meaning.
Would you *want* this to be possible, even apart from its evident
impossibility? For if it *were* possible, you would have made *yourself*
helpless. God is not angry. He merely could not let this happen. You
*cannot* change His Mind.

<sup>55</sup> No rituals that you have set up in which the dance of death delights
you can bring death to the eternal. Nor can your chosen substitute for
the wholeness of God have any influence at all upon it. See in the
special relationship nothing more than a meaningless attempt to raise
other gods before Him and by worshiping them to obscure *their* tininess
and His *greatness*. In the name of your completion, you do not *want*
this. For every idol which you raise to place before Him stands before
*you* in place of what you *are*.

<sup>56</sup> Salvation lies in the simple fact that illusions are not fearful
because they are not *true*. They but seem to be fearful to the extent
to which you fail to recognize them for what they are, and you *will*
fail to do this to the extent to which you *want* them to be true. And
to the same extent you are *denying* truth, and so are making yourself
unable to make the simple choice between truth and illusion, God and
fantasy. Remember this and you will have no difficulty in perceiving the
decision as just what it *is* and nothing more.

<sup>57</sup> The core of the separation delusion lies simply in the *fantasy* of
destruction of love's meaning. And unless love's meaning is *restored*
to you, you cannot know yourself, who *shares* its meaning. Separation
is only the decision *not* to know yourself. Its whole thought system is
a carefully contrived learning experience designed to lead *away* from
truth and into fantasy. Yet for every learning that would hurt you, God
offers you correction and complete escape from *all* its consequences.
The decision whether or not to listen to this course and follow it is
but the choice between truth and illusion. For here is truth *separated*
from illusion and not confused with it at all.

<sup>58</sup> How simple does this choice become when it is perceived as only what
it is. For *only* fantasies made confusion in choosing possible, and
they are totally unreal. This year is thus the time to make the easiest
decision that ever confronted you and also the *only* one. You will
cross the bridge into reality simply because you will recognize that God
is on the other side and nothing *at all* is here. It is impossible
*not* to make the natural decision as this is realized.

