---
chapter: Sixteen
ctitle: The Forgiveness of Illusions
title: The Reward of Teaching
ref: Tx.16.IV
---

<sup>21</sup> You have taught well, and yet you have not learned how to *accept*
the comfort of your teaching. If you will consider what you have taught
and how alien it is to what you thought you knew, you will be compelled
to recognize that your Teacher came from beyond your thought system and
so could look upon it fairly and perceive it was untrue. And He must
have done so from the basis of a very different thought system and one
with *nothing* in common with yours. For certainly what He has taught,
and what you have taught through Him, have nothing in common with what
you taught before He came. And the results have been to bring peace
where there was pain, and suffering has disappeared, to be replaced by
joy.

<sup>22</sup> You have taught freedom, but you have not learned how to be free. We
once said, “By their fruits ye shall know them, and they shall know
themselves.” For it is certain that you judge yourself according to your
teaching. The ego's teaching produces immediate results because its
decisions are immediately accepted as *your* choice. And this acceptance
means that you are willing to judge yourself accordingly. Cause and
effect are very clear in the ego's thought system because all your
learning has been directed towards *establishing* the relationship
between them. And would you not have faith in what you have so
diligently taught yourself to believe? Yet remember how much care you
have exerted in choosing its witnesses and in avoiding those which spoke
for the cause of truth and *its* effects.

<sup>23</sup> Does not the fact that you have not learned what you have taught show
you that you do not perceive the Sonship as one? And does it not also
show you that you do not regard *yourself* as one? For it is impossible
to teach successfully wholly *without* conviction, and it is equally
impossible that conviction be *outside* of you. You could never have
taught freedom unless you *did* believe in it. And it must be that what
you taught came from *yourself*. And yet, this Self you clearly do not
*know* and do not recognize It even though It functions. What functions
must be *there*. And it is only if you deny what It has *done* that you
could possibly deny Its Presence.

<sup>24</sup> This is a course in how to know yourself. You *have* taught what you
are but have not let what you are teach *you*. You have been very
careful to avoid the obvious and not to see the *real* cause and effect
relationship that is perfectly apparent. Yet within you is *everything*
you taught. What can it be that has *not* learned it? It must be this
that is *really* outside yourself, not by your own projection, but in
*truth*. And it is this that you have taken in that is *not* you. What
you accept into your minds does not *really* change them. Illusions are
but beliefs in what is not there. And the seeming conflict between truth
and illusion can only be resolved by separating yourself from the
*illusion* and *not* from truth.

<sup>25</sup> Your teaching has already done this, for the Holy Spirit is part of
*you*. Created by God, He left neither God nor His creation. He is both
God *and* you, as you are God and Him together. For God's answer to the
separation added more to you than you tried to take away. He protected
both your creations and you together, keeping one with you what you
would exclude. And they will take the place of what you took in to
replace them. They are quite real as part of the Self you do not know.
And they communicate to you through the Holy Spirit, and their power and
gratitude to you for their creation they offer gladly to your teaching
of yourself, who is their home. You who are host to God are also host to
them. For nothing real has ever left the mind of its creator. And what
is not real was never *there*.

<sup>26</sup> You are not two selves in conflict. What is beyond God? If you who
hold Him and whom He holds *are* the universe, all else must be
*outside*, where *nothing* is. You have taught this, and from far off in
the universe, yet not beyond yourself, the witnesses to your teaching
have gathered to help you learn. Their gratitude has joined with yours
and God's to strengthen your faith in what you taught. For what you
taught is true. Alone you stand outside your teaching and *apart* from
it. But *with* them you must learn that you but taught *yourself* and
learned from the conviction you shared with them.

<sup>27</sup> This year you will begin to learn and make learning commensurate with
teaching. You have chosen this by your own willingness to teach. Though
you seemed to suffer for it, the joy of teaching will yet be yours. For
the joy of teaching is in the *learner*, who offers it to the teacher in
gratitude and shares it with him. As you learn, your gratitude to your
Self, Who teaches you what He is, will grow and help you honor Him. And
you will learn His power and strength and purity, and love Him as His
Father does. His Kingdom has no limits and no end, and there is nothing
in Him that is not perfect and eternal. All this is *you*, and nothing
outside of this *is* you.

<sup>28</sup> To your most holy Self, all praise is due for what you are and for
what He is Who created you as you are. Sooner or later must everyone
bridge the gap which he imagines exists between his selves. Each one
builds this bridge which carries him *across* the gap as soon as he is
willing to expend some little effort on behalf of bridging it. His
little efforts are powerfully supplemented by the strength of Heaven and
by the united will of all who make Heaven what it is, being joined
within it. And so the one who would cross over is literally transported
there.

<sup>29</sup> Your bridge is builded stronger than you think, and your foot is
planted firmly on it. Have no fear that the attraction of those who
stand on the other side and wait for you will not draw you safely
across. For you *will* come where you would be and where your Self
awaits you.

