---
chapter: One
title: Principles of Miracles
ref: Tx.1.I
---

1.  <sup>1</sup> There is no order of difficulty among miracles. One is not
    “harder” or “bigger” than another. They are all the same. All
    expressions of love are maximal.

2.  <sup>2</sup> Miracles as such do not matter. The only thing that matters is
    their Source, Which is far beyond human evaluation.

3.  <sup>3</sup> Miracles occur naturally as expressions of love. The real miracle
    is the love that inspires them. In this sense, everything that comes
    from love is a miracle.

4.  <sup>4</sup> All miracles mean life, and God is the Giver of life. His Voice
    will direct you very specifically. You will be told all you need to
    know.

5.  <sup>5</sup> Miracles are habits and should be involuntary. They should not be
    under conscious control. Consciously selected miracles can be
    misguided.

6.  <sup>6</sup> Miracles are natural. When they do *not* occur, something has gone wrong.

7.  <sup>7</sup> Miracles are everyone's right, but purification is necessary first.

8.  <sup>8</sup> Miracles are [a form of] healing. They supply a lack, and they are
    performed by those who temporarily have more for those who
    temporarily have less.

9.  <sup>9</sup> Miracles are a kind of exchange. Like all expressions of love,
    which are *always* miraculous in the true sense, the exchange reverses
    the physical laws. They bring *more* love both to the giver *and* the
    receiver.

10. <sup>10</sup> The use of miracles as spectacles to *induce* belief is wrong, or
    better, is a misunderstanding of their purpose. They are really used
    *for* and *by* believers.

11. <sup>11</sup> Prayer is the medium of miracles. Prayer is the natural
    communication of the created with the Creator. Through prayer love
    is received, and through miracles love is expressed.

12. <sup>12</sup> Miracles are thoughts. Thoughts can represent lower-order or
    higher-order reality. This is the basic distinction between
    intellectualizing and thinking. One makes the physical and the other
    creates the spiritual, and we believe in what we make or create.

13. <sup>13</sup> Miracles are both beginnings and endings. They thus alter the
    temporal order. They are always affirmations of rebirth which seem
    to go back but really go forward. They undo the past in the present
    and thus release the future.

14. <sup>14</sup> Miracles bear witness to truth. They are convincing because they
    arise from conviction. Without conviction they deteriorate into
    magic, which is mindless and therefore destructive, or rather the
    uncreative use of mind.

15. <sup>15</sup> Each day should be devoted to miracles. The purpose of time is to
    enable man to learn to use it constructively. Time is thus a
    teaching device and a means to an end. It will cease when it is no
    longer useful in facilitating learning.

16. <sup>16</sup> Miracles are teaching devices for demonstrating that it is more
    blessed to give than to receive. They simultaneously increase the
    strength of the giver and supply strength to the receiver.

17. <sup>17</sup> Miracles are the transcendence of the body. They are sudden
    shifts into invisibility, away from a sense of lower-order reality.
    That is why they heal.

18. <sup>18</sup> A miracle is a service. It is the maximal service one individual
    can render another. It is a way of loving your neighbor as yourself.
    The doer recognizes his own and his neighbor's inestimable worth
    simultaneously.

19. <sup>19</sup> [Miracles make Souls one in Christ.] They depend on cooperation
    because the Sonship is the sum of all the Souls God created.
    Miracles therefore rest on the laws of eternity, not of time.

20. <sup>20</sup> Miracles reawaken the awareness that the spirit, not the body, is
    the altar of truth. This is the recognition that leads to the
    healing power of the miracle.

21. <sup>21</sup> Miracles are natural expressions of total forgiveness. Through
    miracles, man accepts God's forgiveness by extending it to others.

22. <sup>22</sup> Miracles are associated with fear only because of the fallacious
    belief that darkness can *hide*. Man believes that what he cannot see
    does not exist, and his physical eyes cannot see in the dark. This
    is a very primitive solution and has led to a denial of the
    Spiritual eye.[^1] The escape from darkness involves two stages:

    <sup>23</sup> A. The recognition that darkness cannot hide. This step usually entails fear.

    <sup>24</sup> B. The recognition that there is nothing you *want* to hide, even
    if you *could*. This step brings escape from fear.

23. <sup>25</sup> Miracles rearrange perception and place the levels of perception
    in true perspective. This heals at *all* levels, because sickness
    comes from confusing the levels.

    <sup>26</sup> When you have become willing to hide nothing, you will not only
    be willing to enter into communion but will also understand peace
    and joy. Your commitment is not yet total, and that is why you still
    have more to learn than to teach. When your equilibrium stabilizes,
    you will be able to teach as much as you learn, which will give you
    the proper balance. Meanwhile, remember that no effort is wasted,
    for unless you remember this, you cannot avail yourselves of *my*
    efforts, which *are* limitless. Only eternity is real. Why not use the
    illusion of time constructively?

24. <sup>27</sup> Miracles enable man to heal the sick and raise the dead, because
    he made sickness and death himself and can abolish both. You are a
    miracle, capable of creating in the likeness of your Creator.
    Everything else is only your own nightmare and does not exist. Only
    the creations of light are real.

25. <sup>28</sup> Miracles are part of an interlocking chain of forgiveness which,
    when completed, is the Atonement. This process works all the time
    and in all the dimensions of time.

    <sup>29</sup> I am in charge of the process of Atonement, which I undertook to
    begin. When you offer a miracle unto any of my brothers, you do it
    unto *yourself* and me. The reason *you* come before *me* is that I do not
    need miracles for my own Atonement, but I stand at the end in case
    you fail temporarily. The purpose of my part in the Atonement is the
    canceling out of all lacks of love which men could not otherwise
    correct. The word “sin” should be changed to “lack of love,” because
    “sin” is a man-made word with threat connotations which he made up
    himself. No *real* threat is involved anywhere. Nothing is gained by
    frightening yourselves, and it is very destructive to do so.

26. <sup>30</sup> Miracles represent *freedom* from fear. “Atoning” really means
    “undoing.” The undoing of fear is an essential part of the Atonement
    value of miracles.

    <sup>31</sup> The purpose of the Atonement is to restore *everything* to you, or
    rather to restore it to your *awareness*. You were *given* everything when
    you were created, just as everyone was. When you have been restored to
    the recognition of your original state, you naturally become part of the
    Atonement yourself. As you share *my* inability to tolerate lack of love
    in yourself and others, you *must* join the Great Crusade to correct it.
    The slogan for the Crusade is “Listen, learn and *do*”: Listen to my
    voice, learn to undo error, and *do* something to correct it. The first
    two are not enough. The real members of *my* party are *active* workers.

    <sup>32</sup> The power to work miracles *belongs* to you. I will provide the
    opportunities to do them, but *you* must be ready and willing since you
    are already able. Doing them will bring conviction in the ability, since
    conviction really comes through accomplishment. The ability is the
    potential; the achievement is its expression; and the Atonement is the
    purpose.

27. <sup>33</sup> A miracle is a universal blessing from God through me to *all* my
    brothers. It is the privilege of the forgiven to forgive.

    <sup>34</sup> The disciples were specifically told to be physicians of the Lord and
    to heal others. They were also told to *heal themselves* and were promised
    that I would never leave them or forsake them. Atonement is the natural
    profession of the Children of God, because they have professed me.
    “Heaven and earth shall pass away” simply means that they will not
    continue to exist as separate states. My word, which is the resurrection
    and the light, shall not pass away, because light is eternal. *You* are
    the work of God, and His work is wholly lovable and wholly loving. This
    is how a man *must* think of himself in his heart, because this is what he
    *is*.

28. <sup>35</sup> Miracles are a means of organizing different levels of consciousness.

    <sup>36</sup> Miracles come from the below or subconscious level. Revelations come
    from the above or superconscious level. The conscious level is in
    between and reacts to either sub- or superconscious impulses in varying
    ratios. Consciousness is the level which engages in the world and is
    capable of responding to both. Having no impulses from itself and being
    primarily a mechanism for inducing response, it can be very wrong.

    <sup>37</sup> Revelation induces complete but temporary suspension of doubt and
    fear. It represents the original form of communication between God
    and His Souls, involving an extremely personal sense of closeness to
    creation which man tries to find in physical relationships. Physical
    closeness *cannot* achieve this. The subconscious impulses properly
    induce miracles, which are genuinely interpersonal and result in
    real closeness to others. This can be misunderstood by a *personally*
    willful consciousness as impulses toward physical gratification.

    <sup>38</sup> Revelation unites Souls directly with God. Miracles unite [Souls]
    directly with each other. Neither emanates from consciousness, but both
    are *experienced* there. This is essential, because consciousness is the
    state which produces action, though it does *not* inspire it. Man is free
    to believe what he chooses, and what he *does* attests to what he
    believes. The deeper levels of his subconscious *always* contain the
    impulse to miracles, but he is free to fill its more superficial levels,
    which are closer to consciousness, with the impulses of this world and
    to identify himself with them. This results in *denying* himself access to
    the miracle level underneath. In conscious actions, then, his
    relationships also become superficial, and miracle-inspired relating
    becomes impossible.

29. <sup>39</sup> Miracles are a way of *earning* release from fear.

    <sup>40</sup> Revelation induces a state in which fear has *already* been abolished.
    Miracles are thus a means, and revelation is an end. [In this sense,
    they work together.] Miracles do not depend on revelation; they *induce*
    it. Revelation is intensely personal and cannot actually be translated
    into conscious content at all. That is why any attempt to describe it in
    words is usually incomprehensible. Revelation induces *only* experience.
    Miracles, on the other hand, induce [interpersonal] *action*. Miracles are
    more useful now because of their [*impersonal*] nature. In this phase of
    learning, working miracles is more important, because freedom from fear
    cannot be thrust upon you.

30. <sup>41</sup> Miracles praise God through men. They praise God by honoring His
    creations, affirming their perfection. They heal because they deny
    body-identification and affirm Soul-identification. By perceiving
    the spirit, they adjust the levels and see them in proper alignment.
    This places the spirit at the center, where Souls can communicate
    directly.

31. <sup>42</sup> Miracles should inspire gratitude, not awe. Man should thank God
    for what he really is. The Children of God are very holy, and the
    miracle honors their holiness.

    <sup>43</sup> God's creations never lose their holiness, although it can be
    hidden.  The miracle uncovers it and brings it into the light where
    it belongs.  Holiness can never be really hidden in darkness, but
    man can deceive himself about it. This illusion makes him fearful,
    because he knows in his heart it *is* an illusion, and he exerts
    enormous efforts to establish its reality. The miracle sets reality
    where it belongs. Eternal reality belongs only to the Soul, and the
    miracle acknowledges only the truth. It thus dispels man's illusions
    about himself and puts him in communion with himself *and* God.

32. <sup>44</sup> Christ inspires all miracles, which are really intercessions.
    They intercede for man's holiness and make his perceptions holy. By
    placing him beyond the physical laws, they raise him into the sphere
    of celestial order. In *this* order, man *is* perfect.

    <sup>45</sup> The Soul never loses its communion with God. Only the mind needs
    Atonement. The miracle joins in the Atonement of Christ by placing the
    mind in the service of the spirit. This establishes the proper function
    of the mind and corrects its errors.

33. <sup>46</sup> Miracles honor man because he is lovable. They dispel illusions
    about him and perceive the light in him. They thus atone for his
    errors by freeing him from his own nightmares. They release him from
    a prison in which he has imprisoned *himself*, and by freeing his mind
    from illusions, they restore his sanity. Man's mind *can* be possessed
    by illusions, but his spirit is eternally free. If a mind perceives
    without love, it perceives an empty shell and is unaware of the
    spirit within it. But the Atonement restores the Soul to its proper
    place. The mind that serves the spirit is invulnerable.

34. <sup>47</sup> Miracles restore the [Soul] to its fullness. By atoning for lack,
    they establish perfect protection. The strength of the Soul leaves
    no room for intrusions. The forgiven are filled with the Soul, and
    they forgive in return. It is the duty of the released to release
    their brothers.

    <sup>48</sup> The forgiven are the means of Atonement. Those released by Christ
    must join in releasing their brothers, for this is the plan of the
    Atonement. Miracles are the way in which minds which serve the spirit
    unite with Christ for the salvation or release of all God's creations.

35. <sup>49</sup> Miracles are expressions of love, but it does *not* follow that
    they will always [be effective]. I am the only one who can perform
    miracles indiscriminately, because I *am* the Atonement. You have a
    *role* in the Atonement, which I will dictate *to* you. Ask *me* which
    miracles you should perform. This spares you exhaustion, because you
    will act under direct communication.

36. <sup>50</sup> Christ-controlled miracles are part of the Atonement, but
    Christ-guidance is personal [and leads to *personal* salvation]. The
    impersonal nature of miracles is an essential ingredient, because
    this enables me to control their distribution. Christ-guidance leads
    to the highly *personal* experience of revelation. This is why it
    involves *personal* choice. A guide does not control, but he *does*
    direct, leaving the following up to you. “Lead us not into
    temptation” means “guide us out of our own errors.” “Take up thy
    cross and follow me” means, “Recognize your errors and choose to
    abandon them by following my guidance.”

    <sup>51</sup> Remember that error cannot really threaten truth, which can *always*
    withstand it. *Only* the error is really vulnerable. You are free to
    establish your kingdom where you see fit, but the right choice is
    inevitable if you remember this:

    <sup>52</sup> *The Soul is in a state of grace forever.<br/>Man's reality is
    **only** his Soul.<br/>Therefore, man is in a state of grace
    forever.*

    <sup>53</sup> Atonement undoes all errors in this respect and thus uproots the *real*
    source of fear. Whenever God's reassurances are experienced as threat,
    it is *always* because you are defending misplaced and misdirected
    loyalty. That is what projection always involves. Error is lack of love.
    When man projects this onto others, he *does* imprison them, but only to
    the extent that he reinforces errors they have *already* made. This makes
    them vulnerable to the distortions of others since their *own* perception
    of themselves is distorted. The miracle worker can only *bless*, and this
    undoes their distortions and frees them from prison.

37. <sup>54</sup> Miracles are examples of right thinking. Reality contact at all
    levels becomes strong and accurate, thus permitting correct
    delineation of intra- and interpersonal boundaries. As a result, the
    doer's perceptions are aligned with truth as God created it.

38. <sup>55</sup> A miracle is a correction factor introduced into false thinking
    by me. It acts as a catalyst, shaking up erroneous perception and
    reorganizing it properly. This places man under the Atonement
    principle, where his perception is healed. Until this has occurred,
    revelation of the divine order is impossible.

39. <sup>56</sup> The Spiritual eye is the mechanism of miracles, because what It
    perceives *is* true. It perceives both the creations of God and the
    creations of man. Among the creations of man, it can also separate
    the true from the false by Its ability to perceive totally rather
    than selectively. It thus becomes the proper instrument for reality
    testing, which always involves the necessary distinction between the
    false and the true.

40. <sup>57</sup> The miracle dissolves error, because the Spiritual eye identifies
    error as false or unreal. This is the same as saying that by
    perceiving light, darkness automatically disappears.

    <sup>58</sup> Darkness is lack of light, as sin is lack of love. It has no unique
    properties of its own. It is an example of the “scarcity” fallacy, from
    which *only* error can proceed. Truth is always abundant. Those who
    perceive and acknowledge that they have everything have no need for
    driven behavior of *any* kind.

41. <sup>59</sup> The miracle acknowledges all men as your brothers and mine. It is
    a way of perceiving the universal mark of God in them. The
    specialness of God's Sons does *not* stem from exclusion but from
    inclusion. *All* my brothers are special. If they believe they are
    deprived of anything, their perception becomes distorted. When this
    occurs, the whole family of God, or the Sonship, is impaired in its
    relationships. Ultimately, every member of the family of God must
    return. The miracle calls him to return because it blesses and
    honors him even though he may be absent in spirit.

    <sup>60</sup> “God is not mocked” is not a warning but a reassurance on this point.
    God *would* be mocked if any of His creations lacked holiness. The
    creation *is* whole, and the mark of wholeness is holiness.

42. <sup>61</sup> Wholeness is the perceptual content of miracles. It thus corrects
    or atones for the faulty perception of lack anywhere.

    <sup>62</sup> Here we begin to make the fundamental distinction between miracles
    and projection. The stimulus *must* precede the response and will also
    determine the kind of response that is evoked. Behavior *is* response, so
    that the question “response to what?” becomes crucial. Since stimuli are
    identified through perception, you first perceive the stimulus and then
    behave accordingly. It follows, then, that:

    <sup>63</sup> *As ye perceive,<br/>So shall ye behave.*

    <sup>64</sup> The Golden Rule asks you to behave toward others as you would have
    them behave toward you. This means that the perception of both *must* be
    accurate. The Golden Rule is the rule for appropriate behavior. You
    cannot behave appropriately unless you perceive accurately, because
    appropriate behavior *depends* on lack of level confusion. The presence of
    level confusion *always* results in variable reality testing and therefore
    in variability in behavioral appropriateness. Since you and your
    neighbor are equal members of the same family, as you perceive both, so
    you will behave toward both. The way to perceive for Golden Rule
    behavior is to look out from the perception of your *own* holiness and
    perceive the holiness of others.

    <sup>65</sup> The emptiness engendered by fear should be replaced by love, because
    love and its absence are in the same dimension, and correction cannot be
    undertaken except *within* a dimension. Otherwise, there has been a
    confusion of levels. Death is a human affirmation of a belief in
    “[hate],” or level confusion. That is why the Bible says, “There *is* no
    death” and why I demonstrated that death does not exist. I came to
    fulfill the law by *reinterpreting* it. The law itself, if properly
    understood, offers only protection to man. It is those who have not yet
    “changed their minds” who entered the “hellfire” concept into it.

    <sup>66</sup> I assure you that *I* will witness for anyone who lets me and to
    whatever extent he permits it. *Your* witnessing demonstrates *your* belief
    and thus strengthens it. Those who witness for me are expressing through
    their miracles that they have abandoned the belief in deprivation in
    favor of the abundance they have learned *belongs* to them.

43. <sup>67</sup> A *major* contribution of miracles is their strength in releasing
    man from his misplaced sense of isolation, deprivation, and lack.

    <sup>68</sup> Miracles are affirmations of Sonship, which is a state of completion
    and abundance. Whatever is true and real is eternal and *cannot* change or
    *be* changed. The Soul is therefore unalterable because it is *already*
    perfect, but the mind can elect the level it chooses to serve. The *only*
    limit which is put on its choice is that it *cannot* serve two masters.

    <sup>69</sup> The mind, if it elects to do so, becomes a medium by which the Soul
    creates along the line of its own creation. If it does not freely elect
    to do so, it retains its creative *potential* but places itself under
    tyrannous rather than genuinely authoritative control. As a result it
    imprisons, because such are the dictates of tyrants. To change your mind
    means to place it at the disposal of *true* Authority.

    <sup>70</sup> The miracle is thus a sign that the mind has chosen to be led by
    Christ in His service. The abundance of Christ is the natural result of
    choosing to follow Him. *All* shallow roots must be uprooted because they
    are not deep enough to sustain you. The illusion that shallow roots can
    be *deepened* and thus made to hold is one of the distortions on which the
    *reversal* of the Golden Rule rests. As these false underpinnings are
    given up, the equilibrium is temporarily experienced as unstable.
    However, the fact is that *nothing* is less stable than an orientation
    that is upside down. Nor can anything which holds it that way be really
    conducive to greater stability.

44. <sup>71</sup> Miracles arise from a miraculous state of mind. By being one,
    this state of mind goes out to *anyone*, even without the awareness of
    the miracle worker himself. The impersonal nature of miracles is
    because the Atonement itself is one, uniting all creations with
    their Creator.

45. <sup>72</sup> The miracle is an expression of an inner awareness of Christ and
    the acceptance of His Atonement. The mind is then in a state of
    grace and naturally becomes gracious both to the host within and the
    stranger without. By bringing in the stranger, he becomes your
    brother.

46. <sup>73</sup> A miracle is never lost. It touches many people you do not even
    know and sometimes produces undreamed of changes in forces of which
    you are not even aware. That is not your concern. The miracle will
    always bless *you*.

    <sup>74</sup> The miracles you are *not* asked to perform have not lost their value.
    They are still expressions of your own state of grace, but the *action*
    aspect of the miracle should be Christ-controlled because of His
    complete awareness of the whole plan. The impersonal nature of
    miracle-mindedness ensures *your* grace, but only Christ is in a position
    to know where grace can be *bestowed*.

47. <sup>75</sup> Miracle-mindedness means miracle-readiness. Readiness means that
    you should always keep your perceptions straight, so that you will
    *always* be ready, willing, and able. These are the essentials for
    “listen, learn, and do.” You must be *ready* to listen, *willing* to
    learn, and *able* to do. Only the last is involuntary because it is
    the *application* of miracles, which must be Christ-controlled. The
    other two, which are the *voluntary* aspects of miracle-mindedness,
    *are* up to you.

48. <sup>76</sup> Awe is an inappropriate response to miracles.

    <sup>77</sup> Revelation is literally unspeakable because it is an experience of
    unspeakable love. Awe should be reserved for revelation, to which it is
    perfectly and correctly applicable. It is *not* appropriate for miracles,
    because a state of awe is worshipful. It implies that one of a lesser
    order stands before a greater one. This is the case *only* when a Soul
    stands before its Creator. Souls are perfect creations and experience
    awe only in the Presence of the Creator of perfection.

    <sup>78</sup> The miracle, on the other hand, is a sign of love among equals.
    Equals cannot be in awe of one another because awe implies
    inequality.  It is therefore an inappropriate reaction to me. An
    elder brother is entitled to respect for his greater experience and
    a reasonable amount of obedience for his greater wisdom. He is also
    entitled to love because he *is* a brother and also to devotion if he
    is devoted. It is only my devotion that entitles me to yours. There
    is nothing about me that *you* cannot attain. I have nothing that does
    not come from God. The main difference between us as yet is that I
    have *nothing* else. This leaves me in a state of true holiness, which
    is only a *potential* in you.

    <sup>79</sup> “No man cometh unto the Father but by me” is among the most
    misunderstood statements in the Bible. It does *not* mean that I am in any
    way separate or different from you *except in time*, which does not really
    exist at all. Actually, the quotation is more meaningful if it is
    considered on a vertical rather than a horizontal axis. Regarded along
    the vertical, man stands below me and I stand below God. In the process
    of “rising up,” I *am* higher. This is because, without me, the distance
    between God and man would be too great for you to encompass.

    <sup>80</sup> I bridge the distance as an elder brother to man on the one hand and
    as a Son of God on the other. My devotion to my brothers has placed me
    in charge of the Sonship, which I can render complete only to the extent
    to which I can *share* it. This may appear to contradict the statement, “I
    and my Father are one,” but there are still separate parts in the
    statement in recognition that the Father is greater. (The original
    statement was “are of one kind”). The Holy Spirit is the bringer of
    revelations. Revelations are *indirectly* inspired by me because I am
    close to the Holy Spirit and alert to the revelation-readiness of my
    brothers. I can thus *bring* down to them more than they can *draw* down to
    themselves.

49. <sup>81</sup> The Holy Spirit is the highest communication medium. Miracles do
    not involve this type of communication, because they are *temporary*
    communication devices. When man returns to his original form of
    communication with God, the need for miracles is over. The Holy
    Spirit mediates higher to lower communication, keeping the direct
    channel from God to man open for revelation. Revelation is not
    reciprocal. It is always *from* God *to* man. The miracle *is* reciprocal
    because it involves equality.

50. <sup>82</sup> The miracle is a learning device which lessens the need for time.
    In the longitudinal or horizontal plane, the recognition of the true
    equality of all the members of the Sonship appears to involve almost
    endless time. However, the sudden shift from horizontal to vertical
    perception which the miracle entails introduces an interval from
    which the doer and the receiver both emerge much farther along in
    time than they would otherwise have been.

    <sup>83</sup> The miracle thus has the unique property of shortening time by
    rendering the space of time it occupies unnecessary. There is *no*
    relationship between the time a miracle *takes* and the time it
    *covers*. It substitutes for learning that might have taken thousands
    of years. It does this by the underlying recognition of perfect
    equality and holiness between the doer and the receiver on which the
    miracle rests.

    <sup>84</sup> We said before that the miracle abolishes time. It does this by a
    process of *collapsing* it and thus abolishing certain *intervals* within
    it. It does this, however, *within* the larger temporal sequence. It
    establishes an out-of-pattern time interval which is *not* under the usual
    laws of time. Only in this sense is it timeless. By collapsing time, it
    literally saves time. Much as daylight saving time does, it rearranges
    the distribution of light.

51. <sup>85</sup> The miracle is the only device which man has at his immediate
    disposal for controlling time. Only revelation *transcends* time,
    having nothing to do with time at all.

    <sup>86</sup> The miracle is much like the body in that both are learning aids
    which aim at facilitating a state in which they are unnecessary. When
    the Soul's original state of direct communication is reached, neither
    the body nor the miracle serves any purpose. While he believes he is in
    a body, however, man can choose between loveless and miraculous channels
    of expression. He can make an empty shell, but he *cannot* express nothing
    at all. He can wait, delay, paralyze himself, reduce his creativity to
    almost nothing, and even introduce a developmental arrest or even a
    regression. But he *cannot* abolish his creativity. He can destroy his
    medium of communication but *not* his potential.

    <sup>87</sup> Man was *not* created by his own free will alone. Only what *he* creates
    is his to decide. The basic decision of the miracle-minded is not to
    wait on time any longer than is necessary. Time can waste as well as be
    wasted. The miracle-worker, therefore, accepts the time-control factor
    gladly because he recognizes that every collapse of time brings all men
    closer to the ultimate *release* from time in which the Son and the Father
    *are* one.

    <sup>88</sup> Equality does not imply homogeneity *now*. When everyone recognizes
    that he has everything, individual contributions to the Sonship will no
    longer be necessary. When the Atonement has been completed, *all* talents
    will be shared by *all* the Sons of God. God is *not* partial. All His
    Children have His total love, and *all* His gifts are freely given to
    everyone alike. “Except ye become as little children” means that, unless
    you fully recognize your complete dependence on God, you cannot know the
    real power of the Son in his true relationship with the Father.

    <sup>89</sup> You who want peace can find it only by complete forgiveness. You
    never really *wanted* peace before, so there was no point in being
    told how to achieve it. No learning is acquired by anyone unless he
    wants to learn it and believes in some way that he *needs* it. While
    the concept of lack does not exist in the creation of God, it is
    *very* apparent in the creations of man. It is, in fact, the essential
    difference. A need implies lack by definition. It involves the
    recognition that you would be better off in a state which is somehow
    different from the one you are in.

    <sup>90</sup> Until the “separation,” which is a better term than the “fall,”
    nothing was lacking. This meant that man had no needs at all. If he had
    not deprived himself, he would never have experienced them. After the
    separation, needs became the most powerful source of motivation for
    human action. All behavior is essentially motivated by needs, but
    behavior itself is not a divine attribute. The body is the mechanism for
    behavior. The belief that he *could* be better off is the reason why man
    has this mechanism at his disposal.

    <sup>91</sup> Each one acts according to the particular hierarchy of needs he
    establishes for himself. His hierarchy, in turn, depends on his
    perception of what he *is*—that is, what he *lacks*. A sense of separation
    from God is the only *lack* he really needs to correct. This sense of
    separation would never have occurred if he had not distorted his
    perception of truth and thus perceived *himself* as lacking. The concept
    of *any* sort of need hierarchy arose because, having made this
    fundamental error, he had already fragmented himself into levels with
    different needs. As he integrates *he* becomes one, and his needs become
    one accordingly.

    <sup>92</sup> Unified need produces unified action, because it produces a lack of
    ambivalence. The concept of a need hierarchy, a corollary to the
    original error that man can be separated from God, requires correction
    at its own level before the error of perceiving levels at all can be
    corrected. Man cannot behave effectively while he operates at split
    levels. However, while he does, correction must be introduced from the
    bottom *up*. This is because he now operates in space, where concepts such
    as “up” and “down” are meaningful. Ultimately, space is as meaningless
    as time. The concept is really one of space-time *belief*.

    <sup>93</sup> The physical world exists only because man can use it to correct his
    *unbelief*, which placed him in it originally. He can never control the
    effects of fear himself because he *made* fear and believes in what he
    made. In attitude, then, though *not* in content, he resembles his own
    Creator, Who has perfect faith in His creations *because* He created them.
    Belief in a creation produces its existence. That is why a man can
    believe in what no one else thinks is true. It is true for him because
    it was made *by* him.

    <sup>94</sup> Every aspect of fear proceeds from upside-down perception. The
    more truly creative devote their efforts to correcting perceptual
    distortions. The neurotic devotes his to compromise. The psychotic
    tries to escape by establishing the certain truth of his own errors.
    It is most difficult to free him by ordinary means because he is
    more consistent in his own denial of truth. The miracle, however,
    makes no such distinctions. It corrects errors because they are
    errors. Thus, the next point to remember about miracles is:

52. <sup>95</sup> The miracle makes no distinction among degrees of misperception.
    It is a device for perception-correction, effective quite apart from
    either the degree or the direction of the error. This is its *true*
    indiscriminateness.

    <sup>96</sup> Christ-controlled miracles are selective *only* in the sense that they
    are directed towards those who can use them for *themselves*. Since this
    makes it inevitable that they will extend them to others, a strong chain
    of Atonement is welded. However, Christ-control takes no account at all
    of the magnitude of the miracle itself because the concept of size
    exists in a plane that is itself unreal. Since the miracle aims at
    *restoring* the awareness of reality, it would hardly be useful if it were
    bound by the laws which govern the error it aims to correct. Only man
    makes this kind of mistake. It is an example of the foolish consistency
    which his own false beliefs have engendered.

    <sup>97</sup> The power and strength of man's creative will must be understood
    before the real meaning of denial can be appreciated and relinquished.
    It is *not* mere negation. It is a positive miscreation. While the
    miscreation is *necessarily* believed in by its maker, it does not exist
    at all at the level of true creation.

53. <sup>98</sup> The miracle compares what man has made with the higher level
    creation, accepting what is *in accord* as true and rejecting the
    *discordant* as false. *All* aspects of fear are untrue because they do
    not exist at the higher creative level, and therefore do not exist
    at all. To whatever extent a man is willing to submit his beliefs to
    this test, to that extent are perceptions corrected.

    <sup>99</sup> In sorting out the false from the true, the miracle proceeds along
    the following lines:

    <sup>100</sup> *If perfect love casts out fear,<br/>And if fear
    exists,<br/>Then there is **not** perfect love.<br/>But only perfect
    love **really** exists.<br/>If there **is** fear,<br/>It creates a
    state which does not exist.*

    <sup>101</sup> Believe this and you *will* be free. Only God can establish this
    solution, and *this* faith *is* His gift.

[^1]: The term “Spiritual eye” is later replaced by the Holy Spirit, and the “physical eye” becomes the ego. The emphasis on the two ways of seeing, however, remains throughout. [Note: This footnote by the Scribes is contained in the original 1972 manuscript. –Ed.]

