---
chapter: Twenty
ctitle: The Promise of the Resurrection
title: Sin as an Adjustment
ref: Tx.20.IV
---

<sup>16</sup> The belief in sin is an *adjustment*. And an adjustment is a
*change;* a shift in perception or a belief that what was so before has
been made different. Every adjustment is therefore a distortion and
calls upon defenses to uphold it against reality. Knowledge requires
*no* adjustment and in fact is lost if any shift or change is
undertaken. For this reduces it at once to mere perception—a way of
*looking* in which certainty is lost and doubt has entered. To this
impaired condition *are* adjustments necessary because they are not
true. Who need adjust to truth, which calls on only what he is, to
understand?

<sup>17</sup> Adjustments of any kind are of the ego. For it is the ego's fixed
belief that all relationships *depend* upon adjustments to make of them
what it would have them be. Direct relationships, in which there are no
interferences, are *always* seen as dangerous. The ego is the
self-appointed mediator of all relationships, making whatever
adjustments it deems necessary and interposing them between those who
would meet to keep them separate and prevent their union. It is this
studied interference which makes it difficult for you to recognize your
holy relationship for what it is.

<sup>18</sup> The holy do not interfere with truth. They are not afraid of it, for
it is within the truth they recognized their holiness and rejoiced at
what they saw. They looked on it directly, without attempting to adjust
themselves to it or it to them. And so they saw that it was *in* them,
not deciding first where they would *have* it be. Their looking merely
asked a question, and it was what they *saw* that answered them. *You*
make the world and *then* adjust to it, and it to you. Nor is there any
difference between yourself and it in your perception, which made them
*both*.

<sup>19</sup> A simple question yet remains and needs an answer. Do you *like* what
you have made—a world of murder and attack through which you thread your
timid way through constant dangers, alone and frightened, hoping at most
that death will wait a little longer before it overtakes you and you
disappear? *You made this up*. It is a picture of what you think *you*
are, of how you see *yourself*. A murderer *is* frightened, and those
who kill *fear* death. All these are but the fearful thoughts of those
who would adjust themselves to a world made fearful by their
adjustments. And they look out in sorrow from what is sad within and see
the sadness *there.*

<sup>20</sup> Have you not wondered what the world is *really* like; how it would
look through *happy* eyes? The world you see is but a judgment on
yourself. It is not there at all. Yet judgment lays a sentence on it,
justifies it, and makes it *real*. Such is the world you see—a judgment
on yourself and made by *you*. This sickly picture of yourself is
carefully preserved by the ego, whose image it is and which it loves,
and placed outside you in the world. And to this world must you adjust,
as long as you believe this picture is outside and has you at its mercy.
This world *is* merciless, and were it outside you, you should indeed be
fearful. Yet it was you who *made* it merciless, and now if
mercilessness seems to look back at you, it can be *corrected*.

<sup>21</sup> Who in a holy relationship can long remain unholy? The world the holy
see is one with them, just as the world the ego looks upon is like
itself. The world the holy see is beautiful because they see their
innocence in it. They did not tell it what it was; they did not make
adjustments to fit their orders. They gently questioned it and
whispered, “What are you?” And He Who watches over all perception
answered. Take not the judgment of the world as answer to the question,
“What am I?”

<sup>22</sup> The world *believes* in sin, but the belief that made it as you see
it is not outside you. Seek not to make the Son of God *adjust* to his
insanity. There *is* a stranger in him who wandered carelessly into the
home of truth, and who will wander off. He came without a purpose, but
he will not remain before the shining light the Holy Spirit offered and
you accepted. For there the stranger is made homeless and *you* are
welcome.

<sup>23</sup> Ask not this transient stranger, “What am I?” He is the only thing in
all the universe that does not know. Yet it is he you asked, and it is
to his answer that you would adjust. This one wild thought, fierce in
its arrogance and yet so tiny and so meaningless it slips unnoticed
through the universe of truth, becomes your guide. To it you turn to ask
the meaning of the universe. And of the one blind thing in all the
seeing universe of truth you ask, “How shall I look upon the Son of
God?”

<sup>24</sup> Does one ask judgment of what is totally *bereft* of judgment? And if
you have, would you *believe* the answer and adjust to it as if it were
the truth? The world you look on is the answer that it gave you, and
*you* have given it power to adjust the world to *make* its answer true.
You asked this puff of madness for the meaning of your unholy
relationship and adjusted it according to its insane answer. How happy
did it make you? Did you meet with joy to bless the Son of God and give
him thanks for all the happiness which he held out to you? Did you
recognize each other as the eternal gift of God to you? Did you see the
holiness that shone in both of you to bless the other? That is the
purpose of your *holy* relationship. Ask not the means of its attainment
of the one thing that still would have it be unholy. Give it *no* power
to adjust the means and end.

<sup>25</sup> Prisoners bound with heavy chains for years, starved and emaciated,
weak and exhausted and with eyes so long cast down in darkness they
remember not the light, do not leap up in joy the instant they are made
free. It takes a while for them to understand what freedom *is*. You
groped but feebly in the dust and found each other's hand, uncertain
whether to let it go or to take hold on life so long forgotten.
Strengthen your hold and raise your eyes unto your strong companion, in
whom the meaning of your freedom lies. He seemed to be crucified beside
you. And yet his holiness remained untouched and perfect, and with him
beside you, you shall this day enter with him to Paradise and know the
peace of God.

<sup>26</sup> Such is my will for both of you and for each of you for one another
and for himself. Here there is only holiness and joining without limit.
For what is Heaven but union, direct and perfect, and without the veil
of fear upon it? Here are we one, looking with perfect gentleness upon
each other and on ourselves. Here all thoughts of any separation between
us become impossible. You who were prisoners in separation are now made
free in Paradise. And here would I unite with you, my friends, my
brothers, and my Self. Your gift unto each other has given me the
certainty our union will be soon.

<sup>27</sup> Share, then, this faith with me and know that it is justified. There
is no fear in perfect love *because* it knows no sin and it must look on
others as on itself. Looking with charity within, what can it fear
*without*? The innocent see safety, and the pure in heart see God within
His Son and look unto the Son to lead them to the Father. And where else
would they go but where they will to be? Each of you now will lead the
other to the Father as surely as God created His Son holy and kept him
so. In your brother is the light of God's eternal promise of your
immortality. See *him* as sinless, and there can *be* no fear in you.

