---
chapter: Twenty
ctitle: The Promise of the Resurrection
title: Heralds of Eternity
ref: Tx.20.VI
---

<sup>37</sup> In this world, God's Son comes closest to himself in a holy
relationship. There he begins to find the certainty his Father has in
him. And there he finds his function of restoring his Father's laws to
what was held outside them and finding what was lost. Only in time can
*anything* be lost, and *never* lost forever. So do the parts of God's
Son gradually join in time, and with each joining is the end of time
brought nearer. Each miracle of joining is a mighty herald of eternity.
No one who has a single purpose, unified and sure, can be afraid. No one
who shares his purpose with him can *not* be one with him.

<sup>38</sup> Each herald of eternity sings of the end of sin and fear. Each speaks
in time of what is far beyond it. Two voices raised together call to the
hearts of everyone and let them beat as one. And in that single heart
beat is the unity of love proclaimed and given welcome. Peace to your
holy relationship, which has the power to hold the unity of the Son of
God together. You give to one another for everyone, and in your gift is
everyone made glad. Forget not Who has given you the gifts you give, and
through your not forgetting this will you remember Who gave the gifts to
Him to give to you.

<sup>39</sup> It is impossible to overestimate your brother's value. Only the ego
does this, but all *it* means is that it wants the other for itself and
therefore values him too *little*. What is inestimable clearly cannot
*be* evaluated. Do you recognize the fear that rises from the
meaningless attempt to judge what lies so far beyond your judgment you
cannot even see it? Judge not what is invisible to you or you will
*never* see it, but wait in patience for its coming. It will be given
you to see your brother's worth when all you want for him is peace. And
what you want for him, you will receive.

<sup>40</sup> How can you estimate the worth of him who offers peace to you? What
would you *want* except his offering? His worth has been established by
his Father, and you will recognize it as you receive his Father's gift
through him. What is in him will shine so brightly in your grateful
vision that you will merely love him and be glad. You will not think to
judge him, for who would see the face of Christ and yet insist that
judgment still has meaning? For this insistence is of those who do *not*
see. Vision or judgment is your choice, but never both of these.

<sup>41</sup> Your brother's body is as little use to you as it is to him. When it
is used only as the Holy Spirit teaches, it *has* no function, for minds
need not the body to communicate. The sight that sees the body has no
use which serves the purpose of a holy relationship. And while you look
upon each other thus, the means and end have not been brought in line.
Why should it take so many holy instants to let this be accomplished,
when one would do? There *is* but one. The little breath of eternity
that runs through time like golden light is all the same—nothing before
it, nothing afterwards.

<sup>42</sup> *You* look upon each holy instant as a different point in time. *It*
never changes. All that it ever held or will ever hold is here right
*now*. The past takes nothing from it, and the future will add no more.
Here, then, is everything. Here is the loveliness of your relationship,
with means and end in perfect harmony *already*. Here is the perfect
faith that you will one day offer to each other *already* offered you.
And here the limitless forgiveness you will give each other *already*
given; the face of Christ you yet will look upon *already* seen.

<sup>43</sup> Can you evaluate the giver of a gift like this? Would you exchange
this gift for any other? This gift returns the laws of God to your
remembrance. And merely by remembering them, the laws that held you
prisoner to pain and death *must* be forgotten. This is no gift your
brother's body offers you. The veil that hides the gift hides him as
well. He *is* the gift, and yet he knows it not. No more do you. And
yet, have faith that He Who sees the gift in both of you will offer and
receive it for you both. And through His vision will you see it, and
through His understanding recognize it and love it as your own.

<sup>44</sup> Be comforted and feel the Holy Spirit watching over you in love and
perfect confidence in what He sees. He *knows* the Son of God and shares
his Father's certainty the universe rests in his gentle hands in safety
and in peace. Let us consider now what he must learn, to share his
Father's confidence in him. What is he, that the Creator of the universe
should offer it to him and know it rests in safety? He looks upon
himself not as his Father knows him. And yet it is impossible the
confidence of God should be misplaced.

