---
chapter: Twenty
ctitle: The Promise of the Resurrection
title: Entering the Ark
ref: Tx.20.V
---

<sup>28</sup> Nothing can hurt you unless you give it the power to do so. For you
give power as the laws of this world interpret giving—as you give, you
*lose*. It is not up to you to give power at all. Power is of God, given
by Him and reawakened by the Holy Spirit, Who knows that as you give,
you *gain*. He gives no power to sin, and therefore it *has* none; nor
to its results as this world sees them—sickness and death and misery and
pain. These things have not occurred because the Holy Spirit sees them
not and gives no power to their seeming source. Thus would He keep you
free of them. Being without illusion of what you are, the Holy Spirit
merely gives everything to God, Who has already given and received all
that is true. The untrue He has neither received *nor* given.

<sup>29</sup> Sin has no place in Heaven, where its results are alien and can no
more enter than can their source. And therein lies your need to see your
brother sinless. In him is Heaven. See sin in him instead, and Heaven is
lost to you. But see him as he is, and what is yours shines from him to
you. Your savior gives you only love, but what you would *receive* of
him is up to you. It lies in him to overlook all your mistakes, and
therein lies his *own* salvation. And so it is with yours. \[Salvation
is a lesson in giving, as the Holy Spirit interprets it.\] It is the
reawakening of the laws of God in minds that have established other laws
and given them power to enforce what God created not.

<sup>30</sup> *Your* insane laws were made to guarantee that you would make
mistakes and give them power over you by accepting their results as your
just due. What could this be but madness? And is it this that you would
see within your savior from insanity? He is as free from this as you
are, and in the freedom that you see in him, you see your own. For this
you *share.* What God has given follows His laws and His alone. Nor is
it possible for those who follow them to suffer the results of any other
source.

<sup>31</sup> Those who choose freedom will experience only its results. Their
power is of God, and they will give it only to what God has given to
share with them. Nothing but this can touch them, for they see only
this, sharing their power according to the Will of God. And thus their
freedom is established and maintained. It is upheld through all
temptation to imprison and to be imprisoned. It is of them who learned
of freedom that you should ask what freedom is. Ask not the sparrow how
the eagle soars, for those with little wings have not accepted for
themselves the power to share with you.

<sup>32</sup> The sinless give as they received. See, then, the power of
sinlessness within your brother and share with him the power of the
release from sin you offered him. To each who walks this earth in
seeming solitude is a savior given, whose special function here is to
release him and so to free himself. In the world of separation, each is
appointed separately, though they are all the same. Yet those who *know*
that they are all the same need not salvation. And each one finds his
savior when he is ready to look upon the face of Christ and see Him
sinless.

<sup>33</sup> The plan is not of you, nor need you be concerned with anything
except the part that has been given you to learn. For He Who knows the
rest will see to it without your help. But think not that He does not
need your part to help Him with the rest. For in your part lies *all* of
it, without which is no part complete, nor is the whole completed
without your part. The ark of peace is entered two by two, yet the
beginning of another world goes with them. Each holy relationship must
enter here to learn its special function in the Holy Spirit's plan, now
that it shares His purpose. And as this purpose is fulfilled, a new
world rises in which sin can enter not, and where the Son of God can
enter without fear, and where he rests a while to forget imprisonment
and to remember freedom. How can he enter, to rest and to remember,
without *you*? Except you be there, he is not complete. And it is his
completion that he remembers there.

<sup>34</sup> This is the purpose given you. Think not that your forgiveness of
each other serves but you two alone. For the whole new world rests in
the hands of every two who enter here to rest. And as they rest, the
face of Christ shines on them, and they remember the laws of God,
forgetting all the rest and yearning only to have His laws perfectly
fulfilled in them and all their brothers. Think you when this has been
achieved that you will rest *without* them? You could no more leave one
of them outside than I could leave you and forget part of myself.

<sup>35</sup> You may wonder how you can be at peace when, while you are in time,
there is so much that must be done before the way to peace is open.
Perhaps this seems impossible to you. But ask yourself if it is possible
that God would have a plan for your salvation that does *not* work. Once
you accept His plan as the one function that you would fulfill, there
will be nothing else the Holy Spirit will not arrange for you *without*
your effort.

<sup>36</sup> He will go before you making straight your path and leaving in your
way no stones to trip on and no obstacles to bar your way. Nothing you
need will be denied you. Not one seeming difficulty but will melt away
before you reach it. You need take thought for nothing, careless of
everything except the only purpose that you would fulfill. As that was
given you, so will its fulfillment be. God's guarantee will hold against
all obstacles, for it rests on certainty and not contingency. It rests
on *you*. And what can be more certain than a Son of God?

