---
chapter: Twenty
ctitle: The Promise of the Resurrection
title: Thorns and Lilies
ref: Tx.20.III
---

<sup>5</sup> Look upon all the trinkets made to hang upon the body or to cover it
or for its use. See all the useless things made for its eyes to see.
Think on the many offerings made for its pleasure and remember all these
were made to make seem lovely what you hate. Would you employ this hated
thing to draw your brother to you and to attract his body's eyes? Learn
you but offer him a crown of thorns, not recognizing it for what it is
and trying to justify your own interpretation of its value by his
acceptance. Yet still the gift proclaims his worthlessness to you, as
his acceptance and delight acknowledges the lack of value he places on
himself.

<sup>6</sup> Gifts are not made through bodies if they be truly given and received.
For bodies can neither offer nor accept; hold out nor take. Only the
mind can value, and only the mind decides on what it would receive and
give. And every gift it offers depends on what it *wants*. It will adorn
its chosen home most carefully, making it ready to receive the gifts it
wants by offering them to those who come unto its chosen home or those
it would attract to it. And there they will exchange their gifts,
offering and receiving what their minds judge to be worthy of them.

<sup>7</sup> Each gift is an evaluation of the receiver and the *giver*. No one but
sees in his chosen home an altar to himself. No one but seeks to draw to
it the worshipers of what he placed upon it, making it worthy of their
devotion. And each has set a light upon his altar, that they may see
what he has placed upon it and take it for their own. Here is the value
that you lay upon your brother and on yourself. Here is your gift to
*both*; your judgment on the Son of God for what he is. Forget not that
it is your savior to whom the gift is offered. Offer him thorns and
*you* are crucified. Offer him lilies and it is *yourself* you free.

<sup>8</sup> I have great need for lilies, for the Son of God has not forgiven me.
And can I offer him forgiveness when he offers thorns to me? For he who
offers thorns to anyone is against me still, and who is whole without
him? Be you his friend for me that I may be forgiven and you may look
upon the Son of God as whole. But look you first upon the altar in your
chosen home and see what you have laid upon it to offer me. If it be
thorns whose points gleam sharply in a blood-red light, the body is your
chosen home, and it is separation that you offer me. And yet the thorns
are gone. Look you still closer at them now, and you will see your altar
is no longer what it was.

<sup>9</sup> You look still with the body's eyes, and they *can* see but thorns.
Yet you have asked for and received *another* sight. Those who accept
the Holy Spirit's purpose as their own share also His vision. And what
enables Him to see His purpose shine forth from every altar now is yours
as well as His. He sees no strangers, only dearly loved and loving
friends. He sees no thorns, but only lilies, gleaming in the gentle glow
of peace that shines on everything He looks upon and loves.

<sup>10</sup> This Easter look with different eyes upon each other. You *have*
forgiven me. And yet I cannot use your gift of lilies while *you* see
them not. Nor can you use what I have given unless you share it. The
Holy Spirit's vision is no idle gift, no plaything to be tossed about a
while and laid aside. Listen and hear this carefully, nor think it but a
dream—a careless thought to play with or a toy you would pick up from
time to time and then put by. For if you do, so will it be to you.

<sup>11</sup> You have the vision now to look past *all* illusions. It has been
given you to see no thorns, no strangers, and no obstacles to peace. The
fear of God is nothing to you now. Who is afraid to look upon illusions,
knowing his savior stands beside him? With him, your vision has become
the greatest power for the undoing of illusion that God Himself could
give. For what God gave the Holy Spirit, you have received. The Son of
God looks unto you for his release. For you have asked for and been
given the strength to look upon this final obstacle and see no thorns
nor nails to crucify the Son of God and crown him king of death. Your
chosen home is on the other side, beyond the veil. It has been carefully
prepared for you, and it is ready to receive you now. You will not see
it with the body's eyes. Yet all you need you have.

<sup>12</sup> Your home has called to you since time began, nor have you ever
failed entirely to hear. You heard but knew not *how* to look nor
*where*. And now you know. In you the knowledge lies, ready to be
unveiled and freed from all the terror that kept it hidden. There *is*
no fear in love. The song of Easter is the glad refrain the Son of God
was *never* crucified. Let us lift up our eyes together, not in fear,
but faith. And there *will* be no fear in us, for in our vision will be
no illusions—only a pathway to the open door of Heaven, the home we
share in quietness, and where we live in gentleness and peace as one
together.

<sup>13</sup> Would you not have your holy brother lead you there? His innocence
will light your way, offering you its guiding light and sure protection,
and shining from the holy altar within him where you laid the lilies of
forgiveness. Let him be to you the savior from illusions, and look on
him with the new vision that looks upon the lilies and brings *you* joy.
We go beyond the veil of fear, lighting each other's way. The holiness
that leads us is *within* us, as is our home. So will we find what we
were meant to find by Him Who leads us.

<sup>14</sup> This is the way to Heaven and to the peace of Easter, in which we
join in glad awareness that the Son of God is risen from the past and
has awakened to the present. Now is he free, unlimited in his communion
with all that is within him. Now are the lilies of his innocence
untouched by guilt and perfectly protected from the cold chill of fear
and withering blight of sin alike. Your gift has saved him from the
thorns and nails, and his strong arm is free to guide you safely through
them and beyond. Walk with him now rejoicing, for the savior from
illusions has come to greet you and lead you home with him.

<sup>15</sup> Here is your savior and your friend, released from crucifixion
through your vision and free to lead you now where *he* would be. He
will not leave you nor forsake the savior from his pain. And gladly will
you walk the way of innocence together, singing as you behold the open
door of Heaven, and recognize the home that called to you. Give joyously
to one another the freedom and the strength to lead you there. And come
before each other's holy altar where the strength and freedom wait, to
offer and receive the bright awareness that leads you home. The lamp is
lit in both of you for one another. And by the hands that gave it to
each other shall both of you be led past fear to love.

