---
chapter: Thirty
ctitle: The New Beginning
title: The Justification for Forgiveness
ref: Tx.30.VII
---

<sup>70</sup> Anger is *never* justified. Attack has *no* foundation. It is here
escape from fear begins and will be made complete. Here is the real
world given in exchange for dreams of terror. For it is on this
forgiveness rests and is but natural. You are not asked to offer pardon
where attack is due and would be justified. For this would mean that you
forgive a sin by overlooking what is really there. This is not pardon.
For it would assume that, by responding in a way which is not justified,
your pardon will become the answer to attack that has been made. And
thus is pardon inappropriate, by being granted where it is not due.

<sup>71</sup> Pardon is *always* justified. It has a *sure* foundation. You do not
forgive the unforgivable nor overlook a real attack that calls for
punishment. Salvation does not lie in being asked to make unnatural
responses which are inappropriate to what is real. Instead, it merely
asks that you respond appropriately to what is not real by not
perceiving what has not occurred. If pardon were unjustified, you would
be asked to sacrifice your rights when you return forgiveness for
attack. But you are merely asked to see forgiveness as the natural
reaction to distress which rests on error and thus calls for help.
Forgiveness is the *only* sane response. It *keeps* your rights from
being sacrificed.

<sup>72</sup> This understanding is the only change that lets the real world rise
to take the place of dreams of terror. Fear cannot arise unless attack
is justified, and if it had a real foundation, pardon would have none.
The real world is achieved when you perceive the basis of forgiveness is
quite real and fully justified. While you regard it as a gift
unwarranted, it must *uphold* the guilt you would “forgive.” Unjustified
forgiveness *is* attack. And this is all the world can ever give. It
pardons “sinners” sometimes but remains aware that they have sinned. And
so they do not merit the forgiveness that it gives.

<sup>73</sup> This is the false forgiveness which the world employs to *keep* the
sense of sin alive. And recognizing God is just, it seems impossible His
pardon could be real. Thus is the fear of God the sure result of seeing
pardon as unmerited. No one who sees himself as guilty can avoid the
fear of God. But he is saved from this dilemma if he can forgive. The
mind must think of its Creator as it looks upon itself. If you can see
your brother merits pardon, you have learned forgiveness is your right
as much as his. Nor will you think that God intends for you a fearful
judgment which your brother does not merit. For it is the truth that you
can merit neither more nor less than he.

<sup>74</sup> Forgiveness recognized as merited will heal. It gives the miracle its
strength to overlook illusions. This is how you learn that you must be
forgiven too. There can be no appearance that can *not* be overlooked.
For if there were, it would be necessary first there be some sin which
stands beyond forgiveness. There would be an error that is more than a
mistake—a special form of error which remains unchangeable, eternal, and
beyond correction or escape. There would be one mistake which had the
power to undo creation and to make a world which could replace it and
destroy the Will of God. Only if this were possible could there be some
appearances which could withstand the miracle and not be healed by it.

<sup>75</sup> There is no surer proof idolatry is what you wish than a belief there
are some forms of sickness and of joylessness forgiveness cannot heal.
This means that you prefer to keep some idols and are not prepared as
yet to let all idols go. And thus you think that some appearances are
real and not appearances at all. Be not deceived about the meaning of a
fixed belief that some appearances are harder to look past than others
are. It *always* means you think forgiveness must be limited. And you
have set a goal of partial pardon and a limited escape from guilt for
*you*. What can this be except a false forgiveness of yourself and
everyone who seems apart from you?

<sup>76</sup> It must be true the miracle can heal *all* forms of sickness, or it
cannot heal. Its purpose cannot be to judge which forms are real and
which appearances are true. If one appearance must remain apart from
healing, one illusion must be part of truth. And you could not escape
all guilt, but only some of it. You must forgive God's Son *entirely.*
Or you will keep an image of yourself that is not whole and will remain
afraid to look within and find escape from every idol there. Salvation
rests on faith there *cannot* be some forms of guilt which you cannot
forgive. And so there cannot be appearances which have replaced the
truth about God's Son.

<sup>77</sup> Look on your brother with the willingness to see him as he is. And do
not keep a part of him outside your willingness that he be healed. To
heal is to make whole. And what is whole can have no missing parts that
have been kept outside. Forgiveness rests on recognizing this and being
glad there cannot be some forms of sickness which the miracle must lack
the power to heal.

<sup>78</sup> God's Son is perfect, or he cannot *be* God's Son. Nor will you know
him if you think he does not merit the escape from guilt in *all* its
forms and *all* its consequence. There is no way to think of him but
this if you would know the truth about yourself:

<sup>79</sup> *I thank you, Father, for your perfect Son,<br/>
And in his glory will I see my own*.

<sup>80</sup> Here is the joyful statement that there are no forms of evil which
can overcome the Will of God—the glad acknowledgment that guilt has not
succeeded by your wish to make illusions real. And what is this except a
simple statement of the truth?

<sup>81</sup> Look on your brother with this hope in you, and you will understand
he could not make an error that could change the truth in him. It is not
difficult to overlook mistakes that have been given no effects. But what
you see as having power to make an idol of the Son of God you will *not*
pardon. For he has become to you a graven image and a sign of death. Is
*this* your savior? Is his Father wrong about His Son? Or have *you*
been deceived in him who has been given you to heal, for *your*
salvation and deliverance?

