---
chapter: Thirty
ctitle: The New Beginning
title: The Truth Behind Illusions
ref: Tx.30.V
---

<sup>49</sup> You *will* attack what does not satisfy, and thus you will not see
you made it up. You *always* fight illusions. For the truth behind them
is so lovely and so still in loving gentleness, were you aware of it you
would forget defensiveness entirely and rush to its embrace. The truth
could never be attacked. And this you knew when you made idols. They
were made that this might be forgotten. You attack but false ideas and
never truthful ones. All idols are the false ideas you made to fill the
gap you think arose between yourself and what is true. And you attack
them for the things you think they represent. What lies beyond them
cannot *be* attacked.

<sup>50</sup> The wearying, dissatisfying gods you made are blown-up children's
toys. A child is frightened when a wooden head springs up as a closed
box is opened suddenly or when a soft and silent woolly bear begins to
squeak as he takes hold of it. The rules he made for boxes and for bears
have failed him and have broken his “control” of what surrounds him. And
he is afraid because he thought the rules protected him. Now must he
learn the boxes and the bears did not deceive him, broke no rules, nor
mean his world is made chaotic and unsafe. *He* was mistaken. He
misunderstood what made him safe and thought that it had left.

<sup>51</sup> The gap that is not there is filled with toys in countless forms. And
each one seems to break the rules you set for it. It never *was* the
thing you thought. It must appear to break your rules for safety, since
the rules were wrong. But *you* are not endangered. You can laugh at
popping heads and squeaking toys, as does the child who learns they are
no threat to him. Yet while he likes to play with them, he still
perceives them as obeying rules he made for his enjoyment. So there
still are rules which they can seem to break and frighten him. Yet *is*
he at the mercy of his toys? And *can* they represent a threat to him?

<sup>52</sup> Reality observes the laws of God, and not the rules you set. It is
His laws which guarantee your safety. All illusions that you believe
about yourself obey *no* laws. They seem to dance a little while,
according to the rules you set for them. But then they fall and cannot
rise again. They are but toys, my children. Do not grieve for them.
Their dancing never brought you joy. But neither were they things to
frighten you nor make you safe if they obeyed your rules. They must be
neither cherished nor attacked but merely looked upon as children's toys
without a single meaning of their own. See one in them, and you will see
them all. See none in them, and they will touch you not.

<sup>53</sup> Appearances deceive *because* they are appearances and not reality.
Dwell not on them in any form. They but obscure reality, and they bring
fear *because* they hide the truth. Do not attack what you have made to
*let* you be deceived, for thus you prove that you *have* been deceived.
Attack *has* power to make illusions real. Yet what it makes is nothing.
Who could be made fearful by a power that can have no real effects at
all? What could it be but an illusion, making things appear like to
itself? Look calmly at its toys and understand that they are idols which
but dance to vain desires. Give them not your worship, for they are not
there. Yet this is equally forgotten in attack. God's Son needs no
defense against his dreams. His idols do not threaten him at all. His
one mistake is that he thinks them real. What can the power of illusions
*do*?

<sup>54</sup> Appearances can but deceive the mind that *wants* to be deceived. And
you can make a simple choice that will forever place you far beyond
deception. You need not concern yourself with how this will be done, for
this you cannot understand. But you *will* understand that mighty
changes have been quickly brought about when you decide one very simple
thing—you do not *want* whatever you believe an idol gives. For thus the
Son of God declares that he is free of idols. And thus *is* he free.

<sup>55</sup> Salvation is a paradox indeed! What could it be except a happy dream?
It asks you but that you forgive all things that no one ever did, to
overlook what is not there, and not to look upon the unreal as reality.
You are but asked to let your will be done and seek no longer for the
things you do not want. And you are asked to let yourself be free of all
the dreams of what you never were and seek no more to substitute the
strength of idle wishes for the Will of God.

<sup>56</sup> Here does the dream of separation start to fade and disappear. For
here the gap that is not there begins to be perceived without the toys
of terror that you made. No more than this is asked. Be glad indeed
salvation asks so little, not so much. It asks for *nothing* in reality.
And even in illusions it but asks forgiveness be the substitute for
fear. Such is the only rule for happy dreams. The gap is emptied of the
toys of fear, and then its unreality is plain. Dreams are for *nothing*.
And the Son of God can have no need of them. They offer him no single
thing that he could ever want. He is delivered from illusions by his
will and but restored to what he is. What could God's plan for his
salvation be, except a means to give him to Himself?

