---
chapter: Thirty
ctitle: The New Beginning
title: The Only Purpose
ref: Tx.30.VI
---

<sup>57</sup> The real world is the state of mind in which the only purpose of the
world is seen to be forgiveness. Fear is not its goal, and the *escape*
from guilt becomes its aim. The value of forgiveness is perceived and
takes the place of idols which are sought no longer, for their “gifts”
are not held dear. No rules are idly set, and no demands are made of
anyone or anything to twist and fit into the dream of fear. Instead,
there is a wish to understand all things created as they really are. And
it is recognized that all things must be first forgiven, and *then*
understood.

<sup>58</sup> Here, it is thought that understanding is *acquired* by attack.
There, it is clear that by attack is understanding *lost*. The folly of
pursuing guilt as goal is fully recognized. And idols are not wanted
there, for guilt is understood as the sole cause of pain in any form. No
one is tempted by its vain appeal, for suffering and death have been
perceived as things not wanted and not striven for. The possibility of
freedom has been grasped and welcomed, and the means by which it can be
gained can now be understood. The world becomes a place of hope because
its only purpose is to be a place where hope of happiness can be
fulfilled. And no one stands outside this hope because the world has
been united in belief the purpose of the world is one which all must
share if hope be more than just a dream.

<sup>59</sup> Not yet is Heaven quite remembered, for the purpose of forgiveness
still remains. Yet everyone is certain he will go beyond forgiveness,
and he but remains until it is made perfect in himself. He has no wish
for anything but this. And fear has dropped away because he is united in
his purpose with himself. There is a hope of happiness in him so sure
and constant he can barely stay and wait a little longer with his feet
still touching earth. Yet is he glad to wait till every hand is joined
and every heart made ready to arise and go with him. For thus is *he*
made ready for the step in which is all forgiveness left behind.

<sup>60</sup> The final step is God's because it is but God Who could create a
perfect Son and share His Fatherhood with him. No one outside of Heaven
knows how this can be, for understanding this is Heaven itself. Even the
real world has a purpose still beneath creation and eternity. But fear
is gone because its purpose is forgiveness, not idolatry. And so is
Heaven's Son prepared to be himself, and to remember that the Son of God
knows everything his Father understands and understands it perfectly
with Him.

<sup>61</sup> The real world still falls short of this, for this is God's own
purpose—only His, and yet completely shared and perfectly fulfilled. The
real world is a state in which the mind has learned how easily do idols
go when they are still perceived, but wanted not. How willingly the mind
can let them go when it has understood that idols are nothing and
nowhere and are purposeless. For only then can guilt and sin be seen
without a purpose and as meaningless.

<sup>62</sup> Thus is the real world's purpose gently brought into awareness, to
replace the goal of sin and guilt. And all that stood between your image
of yourself and what you are, forgiveness washes joyfully away. Yet God
need not create His Son again that what is his be given back to him. The
gap between your brother and yourself was never *there*. And what the
Son of God knew in creation, he must know again.

<sup>63</sup> When brothers join in purpose in the world of fear, they stand
already at the edge of the real world. Perhaps they still look back and
think they see an idol that they want. Yet has their path been surely
set away from idols toward reality. For when they joined their hands, it
was Christ's hand they took, and they will look on Him Whose hand they
hold. The face of Christ is looked upon before the Father is remembered.
For He must be unremembered till His Son has reached beyond forgiveness
to the love of God. Yet is the love of Christ accepted first. And then
will come the knowledge They are One.

<sup>64</sup> How light and easy is the step across the narrow boundaries of the
world of fear when you have recognized Whose hand you hold! Within your
hand is everything you need to walk with perfect confidence away from
fear forever and to go straight on and quickly reach the gate of Heaven
itself. For He Whose hand you hold was waiting but for you to join Him.
Now that you have come, would *He* delay in showing you the way that He
must walk with you? His blessing lies on you as surely as His Father's
love rests upon Him. His gratitude to you is past your understanding,
for you have enabled Him to rise from chains and go with you together to
His Father's house.

<sup>65</sup> An ancient hate is passing from the world. And with it goes all
hatred and all fear. Look back no longer, for what lies ahead is all you
ever wanted in your hearts. Give up the world! But not to sacrifice. You
never *wanted* it. What happiness have you sought here that did not
bring you pain? What moment of content has not been bought at fearful
price in coins of suffering? Joy *has* no cost. It is your sacred right,
and what you pay for is not happiness. Be speeded on your way by
honesty, and let not your experiences here deceive in retrospect. They
were not free from bitter cost and joyless consequence.

<sup>66</sup> Do not look back except in honesty. And when an idol tempts you,
think of this:

<sup>67</sup> *There never was a time an idol brought you anything except the
“gift” of guilt. Not one was bought except at cost of pain, nor was it
ever paid by you alone.*

<sup>68</sup> Be merciful unto your brother, then. And do not choose an idol
thoughtlessly, remembering that he will pay the cost as well as you. For
he will be delayed when you look back, and you will not perceive Whose
loving hand you hold. Look forward, then, and walk in confidence with
happy hearts that beat in hope and do not pound in fear.

<sup>69</sup> The Will of God forever lies in those whose hands are joined. Until
they joined, they thought He was their enemy. But when they joined and
shared a purpose, they were free to learn their will is one. And thus
the Will of God must reach to their awareness. Nor can they forget for
long that it is but their own.

