---
chapter: Thirty
ctitle: The New Beginning
title: Freedom of Will
ref: Tx.30.III
---

<sup>33</sup> Do you not understand that to oppose the Holy Spirit is to fight
*yourself*? He tells you but *your* will; He speaks for *you.* In His
divinity is but your own. And all He knows is but your knowledge, saved
for you that you may do your will through Him. God *asks* you do your
will. He joins with *you*. He did not set His Kingdom up alone. And
Heaven itself but represents your will, where everything created is for
you. No spark of life but was created with your glad consent, as you
would have it be. And not one Thought that God has ever had but waited
for your blessing to be born. God is no enemy to you. He asks no more
than that He hear you call Him “Friend.”

<sup>34</sup> How wonderful it is to do your will! For that is freedom. There is
nothing else that ever should be called by freedom's name. Unless you do
your will, you are not free. And would God leave His Son without what he
has chosen for himself? God but ensured that you would never lose your
will when He gave you His perfect answer. Hear it now that you may be
reminded of His love and learn your will. God would not have His Son
made prisoner to what he does not want. He *joins* with you in willing
you be free. And to oppose Him is to make a choice against *yourself*
and choose that *you* be bound.

<sup>35</sup> Look once again upon your enemy, the one you chose to hate instead of
love. For thus was hatred born into the world, and thus the rule of fear
established there. Now hear God speak to you through Him Who is His
Voice and yours as well, reminding you that it is not your will to hate
and be a prisoner to fear, a slave to death, a little creature with a
little life. Your will is boundless; it is not your will that it be
bound. What lies in you has joined with God Himself in all creation's
birth. Remember He Who has created you and through your will created
everything. Not one created thing but gives you thanks, for it is by
your will that it was born. No light of Heaven shines except for you,
for it was set in Heaven by your will.

<sup>36</sup> What cause have you for anger in a world which merely waits your
blessing to be free? If you be prisoner, then God Himself could not be
free. For what is done to him whom God so loves is done to God Himself.
Think not He wills to bind you, Who has made you co-creator of the
universe along with Him. He would but keep your will forever and forever
limitless.

<sup>37</sup> This world awaits the freedom you will give when you have recognized
that *you* are free. But you will not forgive the world until you have
forgiven Him Who gave your will to you. For it is *by* your will the
world is given freedom. Nor can you be free apart from Him Whose holy
will you share. God turns to you to ask the world be saved, for by your
own salvation it is healed. And no one walks upon the earth but must
depend on your decision, that he learn death has no power over him
because he shares your freedom as he shares your will. It *is* your will
to heal him, and because you have decided *with* him, he is healed. And
now is God forgiven, for you chose to look upon your brother as a
friend.

