---
chapter: Thirty
ctitle: The New Beginning
title: Changeless Reality
ref: Tx.30.IX
---

<sup>89</sup> Appearances deceive but can be changed. Reality is changeless. It
does not deceive at all, and if you fail to see beyond appearances, you
*are* deceived. For everything you see will change, and yet you thought
it real before, and now you think it real again. Reality is thus reduced
to form and capable of change. Reality is changeless. It is this that
makes it real and keeps it separate from *all* appearances. It must
transcend all form to be itself. It *cannot* change.

<sup>90</sup> The miracle is means to demonstrate that all appearances can change
because they *are* appearances and cannot have the changelessness
reality entails. The miracle attests salvation from appearances by
*showing* they can change. Your brother has a changelessness in him
beyond appearance and deception both. It is obscured by changing views
of him which you *perceive* as his reality. The happy dream about him
takes the form of the appearance of his perfect health, his perfect
freedom from all forms of lack, and safety from disaster of all kinds.
The miracle is proof he is not bound by loss or suffering in any form
because it can so easily be *changed.* This demonstrates that it was
*never* real and could not stem from his reality. For that is changeless
and has no effects which anything in Heaven or on earth could ever
alter. But appearances are shown to be unreal *because* they change.

<sup>91</sup> What is temptation but a wish to make illusions real? It does not
seem to be the wish that no reality be so. Yet it is an assertion that
some forms of idols have a powerful appeal which makes them harder to
resist than those you would not *want* to have reality. Temptation,
then, is nothing more than this—a prayer the miracle touch not some
dreams but keep their unreality obscure and give to them reality
instead. And Heaven gives no answer to the prayer, nor can a miracle be
given you to heal appearances you do not like. You have established
*limits*. What you ask *is* given you, but not of God Who knows no
limits. You have limited *yourself.*

<sup>92</sup> Reality is changeless. Miracles but show what you have interposed
between reality and your awareness is unreal and does not interfere at
all. The cost of the belief there must be some appearances beyond the
hope of change is that the miracle cannot come forth from you
consistently. For you have *asked* it be withheld from power to heal all
dreams. There is no miracle you cannot have when you *desire* healing.
But there is no miracle that can be given you unless you want it. Choose
what you would heal, and He Who gives all miracles has not been given
freedom to bestow His gifts upon God's Son. When he is tempted, he
denies reality. And he becomes the willing slave of what he chose
instead.

<sup>93</sup> *Because* reality is changeless is a miracle already there to heal
all things that change and offer them to you to see in happy form,
devoid of fear. It will be given you to look upon your brother thus. But
not while you would have it otherwise in some respects. For this but
means you would not have him healed and whole. The Christ in him is
perfect. Is it this that you would look upon? Then let there be no
dreams about him which you would prefer to seeing this. And you will see
the Christ in him because you *let* Him come to you. And when He has
appeared to you, you will be certain you are like Him, for He is the
changeless in your brother *and* in you.

<sup>94</sup> This will you look upon when you decide there is not one appearance
you would hold in place of what your brother really is. Let no
temptation to prefer a dream allow uncertainty to enter here. Be not
made guilty and afraid when you are tempted by a dream of what he is.
But do not give it power to replace the changeless in him in your sight
of him. There is no false appearance but will fade if you request a
miracle instead. There is no pain from which he is not free if you would
have him be but what he is. Why should you fear to see the Christ in
him? You but behold *your Self* in what you see. As he is healed are you
made free of guilt, for his appearance *is* your own to you.

