---
chapter: Thirty
ctitle: The New Beginning
title: Rules for Decision
ref: Tx.30.II
---

<sup>2</sup> Decisions are continuous. You do not always know when you are making
them. But with a little practice with the ones you recognize, a set
begins to form which sees you through the rest. It is not wise to let
yourself become preoccupied with every step you take. The proper set,
adopted consciously each time you wake, will put you well ahead. And if
you find resistance strong and dedication weak, you are not ready. *Do
not fight yourself*. But think about the kind of day you want and tell
yourself there *is* a way in which this very day can happen just like
that. Then try again to have the day you want.

1. <sup>3</sup> The outlook starts with this:

    <sup>4</sup> *Today I will make no decision by myself*.

    <sup>5</sup> This means that you are choosing not to be the judge of what to do.
    But it must also mean you will not judge the situations where you will
    be called upon to make response. For if you judge them, you have set the
    rules for how you should react to them. And then another answer cannot
    but produce confusion and uncertainty and fear.

    <sup>6</sup> This is your major problem now. You still make up your mind and *then*
    decide to ask what you should do. And what you hear may not resolve the
    problem as *you* saw it first. This leads to fear because it contradicts
    what you perceive, and so you feel attacked. And therefore angry. There
    are rules by which this will not happen. But it does occur at first,
    while you are learning how to hear.

2. <sup>7</sup> Throughout the day, at any time you think of it and have a quiet
moment for reflection, tell yourself again the kind of day you want, the
feelings you would have, the things you want to happen to you, and the
things you would experience and say,

    <sup>8</sup> *If I make no decision by myself,<br/>
    This is the day that will be **given** me*.

    <sup>9</sup> These two procedures, practiced well, will serve to let you be
    directed without fear, for opposition will not first arise and then
    become a problem in itself.

    <sup>10</sup> But there will still be times when you have judged *already.* Now the
    answer will provoke attack unless you quickly straighten out your mind
    to want an answer that will work. Be certain this has happened if you
    feel yourself unwilling to sit by and ask to have the answer given you.
    This means you *have* decided by yourself and cannot see the *question*.
    Now you need a quick restorative before you ask.

3. <sup>11</sup> Remember once again the day you want and recognize that something
has occurred which is not part of it. Then realize that you have asked a
question by yourself and must have set an answer in your terms. Then
say,

    <sup>12</sup> *<strong>I have</strong> no question. I forgot what to decide.*

    <sup>13</sup> This cancels out the terms which you have set and lets the *answer*
    show you what the question must have really been.

    <sup>14</sup> Try to observe this rule without delay despite your opposition. For
    you have *already* gotten angry, and your fear of being answered in a
    different way from what your version of the question asks will gain
    momentum until you believe the day you want is one in which you get
    *your* answer to *your* question. And you will not get it, for it would
    destroy the day by robbing you of what you *really* want. This can be
    very hard to realize when once you have decided by yourself the rules
    which promise you a happy day. Yet this decision still can be undone by
    simple methods which you can accept.

4. <sup>15</sup> If you are so unwilling to receive you cannot even let your
question go, you can begin to change your mind with this:

    <sup>16</sup> *At least I can decide I do not **like** what I feel now.*

    <sup>17</sup> This much is obvious and paves the way for the next easy step.

5. <sup>18</sup> Having decided that you do not like the way you feel, what could
be easier than to continue with,

    <sup>19</sup> *And so I **hope** I have been wrong.*

    <sup>20</sup> This works against the sense of opposition and reminds you that help
    is not being thrust upon you but is something that you want and that you
    need, because you do not like the way you feel. This tiny opening will
    be enough to let you go ahead with just a few more steps you need to let
    yourself be helped.

    <sup>21</sup> Now you have reached the turning point, because it has occurred to
    you that *you* will gain if what you have decided is not so. Until this
    point is reached, you will believe your happiness depends on being
    *right*. But this much reason have you now attained—you would be better
    off if you were *wrong*.

6. <sup>22</sup> This tiny grain of wisdom will suffice to take you further. You
are not coerced but merely hope to get a thing you want. And you can say
in perfect honesty,

    <sup>23</sup> *<strong>I want</strong> another way to look at this.*

    <sup>24</sup> Now you have changed your mind about the day and have remembered what
    you *really* want. Its purpose has no longer been obscured by the insane
    belief you want it for the goal of being right when you are wrong. Thus
    is the readiness for asking brought to your awareness, for you cannot be
    in conflict when you ask for what you want and see that it *is* this for
    which you ask.

7. <sup>25</sup> This final step is but acknowledgment of lack of opposition to be
helped. It is a statement of an open mind, not certain yet, but willing
to be shown:

    <sup>26</sup> *Perhaps there **is** another way to look at this.<br/>
    What can I **lose** by asking?*

    <sup>27</sup> Thus you now can ask a question that makes
    sense, and so the answer will make sense as well. Nor will you fight
    against it, for you see that it is *you* who will be helped by it.

<sup>28</sup> It must be clear that it is easier to have a happy day if you prevent
unhappiness from entering at all. But this takes practice in the rules
which will protect you from the ravages of fear. When this has been
achieved, the sorry dream of judgment has forever been undone. But
meanwhile, you have need for practicing the rules for its undoing. Let
us, then, consider once again the very first of the decisions which are
offered here.

<sup>29</sup> We said you can begin a happy day with the determination not to make
decisions by yourself. This seems to be a real decision in itself. And
yet, you *cannot* make decisions by yourself. The only question really
is with *what* you choose to make them. That is really all. The first
rule, then, is not coercion but a simple statement of a simple fact. You
will not make decisions by yourself *whatever* you decide. For they are
made with idols or with God. And you ask help of Christ or anti-Christ,
and which you choose will join with you and tell you what to do.

<sup>30</sup> Your day is not at random. It is set by what you choose to live it
with and how the friend whose counsel you have sought perceives your
happiness. You always ask advice before you can decide on anything. Let
*this* be understood, and you can see there cannot be coercion here nor
grounds for opposition that you may be free. There *is* no freedom from
what must occur. And if you think there is, you must be wrong.

<sup>31</sup> The second rule as well is but a fact. For you and your advisor must
agree on what you want before it can occur. It is but this *agreement*
which permits all things to happen. Nothing can be caused without some
form of union, be it with a dream of judgment or the Voice for God.
Decisions cause results *because* they are not made in isolation. They
are made by you and your advisor for yourself and for the world as well.
The day you want you offer to the world, for it will be what you have
asked for and will reinforce the rule of your advisor in the world.
Whose kingdom is the world for you today? What kind of day will you
decide to have?

<sup>32</sup> It needs but two who would have happiness this day to promise it to
all the world. It needs but two to understand that they cannot decide
alone to guarantee the joy they asked for will be wholly shared. For
they have understood the basic law that makes decision powerful and
gives it all effects that it will ever have. It needs but two. These two
are joined before there *can* be a decision. Let this be the one
reminder that you keep in mind, and you will have the day you want and
give it to the world by having it yourself. Your judgment has been
lifted from the world by your decision for a happy day. And as you have
received, so must you give.

