---
chapter: Twenty Four
ctitle: Specialness and Separation
title: The Forgiveness of Specialness
ref: Tx.24.IV
---

<sup>26</sup> Forgiveness is the end of specialness. Only illusions can be
forgiven, and then they disappear. Forgiveness is release from *all*
illusions, and that is why it is impossible but partly to forgive. No
one who clings to one illusion can see himself as sinless, for he holds
one error to himself as lovely still. And so he calls it “unforgivable”
and makes it sin. How can he then *give* his forgiveness wholly, when he
would not receive it for himself? For it is sure he would receive it
wholly the instant that he gave it so. And thus his secret guilt would
disappear, forgiven by himself.

<sup>27</sup> Whatever form of specialness you cherish, you have made sin.
Inviolate it stands, strongly defended with all your puny might against
the Will of God. And thus it stands against yourself; *your* enemy, not
God's. So does it seem to split you off from God and make you separate
from Him as its defender. You would protect what God created not. And
yet this idol that seems to *give* you power has taken it away. For you
have given your brother's birthright to it, leaving him alone and
unforgiven and yourself in sin beside him, both in misery before the
idol that can save you not.

<sup>28</sup> It is not *you* that is so vulnerable and open to attack that just a
word, a little whisper that you do not like, a circumstance that suits
you not, or an event that you did not anticipate upsets your world and
hurls it into chaos. Truth is not frail. Illusions leave it perfectly
unmoved \[and undisturbed\]. But specialness is *not* the truth in you.
*It* can be thrown off balance by anything. What rests on nothing
*never* can be stable. However large and overblown it seems to be, it
still must rock and turn and whirl about with every breeze.

<sup>29</sup> Without foundation nothing is secure. Would God have left His Son in
such a state, where safety has no meaning? No, His Son is safe, resting
on Him. It is your specialness that is attacked by everything that walks
and breathes or creeps or crawls or even lives at all. Nothing is safe
from its attack, and it is safe from nothing. It will forever more be
unforgiving, for that is what it *is*—a secret vow that what God wants
for you will never be and that you will oppose His Will forever. Nor is
it possible the two can ever be the same while specialness stands like a
flaming sword of death between them and makes them “enemies.”

<sup>30</sup> God asks for your forgiveness. He would have no separation, like an
alien will, rise between what He wills for you and what you will. They
*are* the same, for neither one wills specialness. How could they will
the death of love itself? Yet they are powerless to make attack upon
illusions. They are not bodies; as One mind they wait for all illusions
to be brought to them and left behind. Salvation challenges not even
death. And God Himself, Who knows that death is not your will, must say,
“Thy will be done” because *you* think it *is*.

<sup>31</sup> Forgive the great Creator of the universe, the Source of life, of
love and holiness, the perfect Father of a perfect Son, for your
illusions of your specialness. Here is the hell you chose to be your
home. He chose not this for you. Ask not He enter this. The way is
barred to love and to salvation. Yet if you would release your brother
from the depths of hell, you have forgiven Him Whose Will it is you rest
forever in the arms of peace in perfect safety and without the heat and
malice of one thought of specialness to mar your rest. Forgive the Holy
One the specialness He could not give and which you made instead.

<sup>32</sup> The special ones are all asleep, surrounded by a world of loveliness
they do not see. Freedom and peace and joy stand there beside the bier
on which they sleep and call them to come forth and waken from their
dream of death. Yet they hear nothing. They are lost in dreams of
specialness. They hate the call that would awaken them, and they curse
God because He did not make their dream reality. Curse God and die, but
not by Him Who made not death, but only in the dream. Open your eyes a
little; see the savior God gave to you that you might look on him and
give him back his birthright. It is *yours.*

<sup>33</sup> The slaves of specialness will yet be free. Such is the Will of God
and of His Son. Would God condemn *Himself* to hell and to damnation?
And do *you* will that this be done unto your savior? God calls to you
from him to join His Will to save you *both* from hell. Look on the
print of nails upon his hands that he holds out for your forgiveness.
God asks your mercy on His Son and on Himself. Deny them not. They ask
of you but that your will be done. They seek your love that you may love
yourself. Love not your specialness instead of them. The print of nails
are on your hands as well. Forgive your Father. It was not His Will that
you be crucified.

