---
chapter: Twenty Four
ctitle: Specialness and Separation
title: The Treachery of Specialness
ref: Tx.24.III
---

<sup>12</sup> Comparison must be an ego device, for love makes none. Specialness
*always* makes comparisons. It is established by a lack seen in another
and maintained by searching for and keeping clear in sight all lacks it
can perceive. This does it seek, and this it looks upon. And always whom
it thus diminishes would be your savior, had you not chosen to make of
him a tiny measure of your specialness instead. Against the littleness
you see in him, you stand as tall and stately, clean and honest, pure
and unsullied by comparison with what you see. Nor do you understand it
is *yourself* that you diminish thus.

<sup>13</sup> Pursuit of specialness is always at the cost of peace. Who can attack
his savior and cut him down yet *recognize* his strong support? Who can
detract from his omnipotence yet *share* his power? And who can use him
as the gauge of littleness and be *released* from limits? You have a
function in salvation. Its pursuit will bring you joy. But the pursuit
of specialness *must* bring you pain. Here is a goal that would defeat
salvation and thus run counter to the Will of God. To value specialness
is to esteem an alien will to which illusions of yourself are dearer
than the truth.

<sup>14</sup> Specialness is the idea of sin made real. Sin is impossible even to
imagine without this base. For sin arose from it out of nothingness; an
evil flower with no roots at all. Here is the self-made “savior,” the
“creator” who creates unlike the Father and which made His Son like to
itself and not like unto Him. His “special” sons are many, *never* one,
each one in exile from himself and Him of Whom they are a part. Nor do
they love the Oneness Which created them as one with Him. They chose
their specialness instead of Heaven and instead of peace and wrapped it
carefully in sin to keep it “safe” from truth.

<sup>15</sup> You are *not* special. If you think you are and would defend your
specialness against the truth of what you *really* are, how can you know
the truth? What answer that the Holy Spirit gives can reach you, when it
is your specialness to which you listen and which asks and answers? Its
tiny answer, soundless in the melody which pours from God to you
eternally in loving praise of what you are, is all you listen to. And
that vast song of honor and of love for what you are seems silent and
unheard before its “mightiness.” You strain your ears to hear its
soundless voice, and yet the Call of God Himself is soundless to you.

<sup>16</sup> You can defend your specialness, but never will you hear the Voice
for God beside it. They speak a different language and they fall on
different ears. To every special one a different message, and one with
different meaning, is the truth. Yet how can truth be different to each
one? The special messages the special hear convince them they are
different and apart—each in his special sins and “safe” from love, which
does not see his specialness at all. Christ's vision is their “enemy,”
for it sees not what they would look upon, and it would show them that
the specialness they think they see *is* an illusion. What would they
see instead?

<sup>17</sup> The shining radiance of the Son of God—so like his Father that the
memory of Him springs instantly to mind. And with this memory, the Son
remembers his own creations, as like to him as he is to his Father. And
all the world he made and all his specialness and all the sins he held
in its defense against himself will vanish as his mind accepts the truth
about himself as it returns to take their place. This is the only “cost”
of truth: you will no longer see what never was, nor hear what makes no
sound. Is it a sacrifice to give up nothing and to receive the love of
God forever?

<sup>18</sup> You who have chained your savior to your specialness and given it his
place, remember this: He has not lost the power to forgive you all the
sins you think you placed between him and the function of salvation
given him for you. Nor will you change his function, any more than you
can change the truth in him and in yourself. But be you certain that the
truth is just the same in both. It gives no different messages and has
*one* meaning. And it is one you *both* can understand, and one which
brings release to *both* of you. Here stands your brother with the key
to Heaven in his hand held out to you. Let not the dream of specialness
remain between you. What is one is joined in truth.

<sup>19</sup> Think of the loveliness that you will see within yourself when you
have looked on him as on a friend. He *is* the enemy of specialness but
only friend to what is real in you. Not one attack you thought you made
on him has taken from him the gift that God would have him give to you.
His need to give it is as great as yours to have it. Let him forgive you
all your specialness and make you whole in mind and one with him. He
waits for your forgiveness only that he may return it unto you. It is
not God Who has condemned His Son. But only you, to save his specialness
and kill his Self.

<sup>20</sup> You have come far along the way of truth—too far to falter now. Just
one step more and every vestige of the fear of God will melt away in
love. Your brother's specialness and yours *are* enemies and bound in
hate to kill each other and deny they are the same. Yet it is not
illusions which have reached this final obstacle that seems to make God
and His Heaven so remote that they cannot be reached. Here in this holy
place does truth stand waiting to receive you both in silent blessing
and in peace so real and so encompassing that nothing stands outside.
Leave all illusions of yourself outside this place to which you come in
hope and honesty.

<sup>21</sup> Here is your savior *from* your specialness. He is in need of your
acceptance of himself as part of you, as you for his. You are alike to
God as God is to Himself. He is not special, for He would not keep one
part of what He is unto Himself, not given to His Son but kept for Him
alone. And it is this you fear, for if He is not special, then He willed
His Son be like Him, and your brother *is* like you. Not special, but
possessed of everything *including* you.

<sup>22</sup> Give him but what he has, remembering God gave Himself to both of you
in equal love that both might share the universe with Him Who chose that
love could never be divided and kept separate from what it is and must
forever be. You *are* your brother's; part of love was not denied to
him. But can it be that *you* have lost because *he* is complete? What
has been given him makes *you* complete, as it does him. God's love gave
you to him and him to you because He gave Himself. What is the same as
God is one with Him. And only specialness could make the truth of God
and you *as* one seem anything but Heaven and the hope of peace at last
in sight.

<sup>23</sup> Specialness is the seal of treachery upon the gift of love. Whatever
serves its purpose must be given to kill. No gift that bears its seal
but offers treachery to giver *and* receiver. Not one glance from eyes
it veils but looks on sight of death. Not one believer in its potency
but seeks for bargains and for compromise that would establish sin
love's substitute and serve it faithfully. And no relationship that
holds its purpose dear but clings to murder as safety's weapon and the
great defender of all illusions from the “threat” of love.

<sup>24</sup> The hope of specialness makes it seem possible God made the body as
the prison-house which keeps His Son from Him. For it demands a special
place God cannot enter and a hiding-place where none is welcome but your
tiny self. Nothing is sacred here but unto you and you alone, apart and
separate from all your brothers, safe from all intrusions of sanity upon
illusions, safe from God, and safe for conflict everlasting. Here are
the gates of hell you closed upon yourself, to rule in madness and in
loneliness your special kingdom, apart from God, away from truth and
from salvation.

<sup>25</sup> The key you threw away God gave your brother, whose holy hands would
offer it to you when you were ready to accept His plan for your
salvation in place of yours. How could this readiness be reached save
through the sight of all your misery and the awareness that your plan
has failed and will forever fail to bring you peace and joy of any kind?
Through this despair you travel now, yet it is but *illusion* of
despair. The death of specialness is not *your* death but your awaking
into life eternal. You but emerge from an illusion of what you are to
the acceptance of yourself as God created you.

