---
chapter: Twenty Four
ctitle: Specialness and Separation
title: The Meeting Place
ref: Tx.24.VIII
---

<sup>62</sup> How bitterly does everyone tied to this world defend the specialness
he wants to be the truth! His wish is law unto him, and he obeys.
Nothing his specialness demands does he withhold. Nothing it needs does
he deny to what he loves. And while it calls to him, he hears no other
Voice. No effort is too great, no cost too much, no price too dear to
save his specialness from the least slight, the tiniest attack, the
whispered doubt, the hint of threat, or anything but deepest reverence.
This is your son, beloved of you as you are to your Father. Yet it
stands in place of your creations, who *are* son to you, that you might
*share* the Fatherhood of God, not snatch it from Him. What is this son
that you have made to be your strength? What is this child of earth on
whom such love is lavished? What is this parody of God's creation that
takes the place of yours? And where are *they*, now that the host of God
has found another son which he prefers to them?

<sup>63</sup> The memory of God shines not alone. What is within your brother still
contains all of creation, everything created and creating, born and
unborn as yet, still in the future or apparently gone by. What is in him
is changeless, and your changelessness is recognized in its
acknowledgment. The holiness in you belongs to him. And by your seeing
it in him, returns to you. All of the tribute you have given specialness
belongs to him and thus returns to you. All of the love and care, the
strong protection, the thought by day and night, the deep concern, the
powerful conviction this is you belong to him. Nothing you gave to
specialness but is his due. And nothing due him is not due to you.

<sup>64</sup> How can you know your worth while specialness claims you instead? How
can you fail to know it is in his holiness? Seek not to make your
specialness the truth, for if it were, you would be lost indeed. Be
thankful, rather, it is given you to see his holiness *because* it is
the truth. And what is true in him must be as true in you.

<sup>65</sup> Ask yourself this: can *you* protect the mind? The body, yes, a
little—not from time, but temporarily. And much you think you save, you
hurt. What would you save it *for*? For in that choice lie both its
health and harm. Save it for show, as bait to catch another fish, to
house your specialness in better style or weave a frame of loveliness
around your hate, and you condemn it to decay and death. And if you see
this purpose in your brother's, such is your condemnation of your own.
Weave, rather then, a frame of holiness around him that the truth may
shine on him and give you safety from decay.

<sup>66</sup> The Father keeps what He created safe. You cannot touch it with the
false ideas you made because it was created not by you. Let not your
foolish fancies frighten you. What is immortal cannot *be* attacked;
what is but temporal *has* no effect. Only the purpose that you see in
it has meaning, and if that is true, its safety rests secure. If not, it
has no purpose and is means for nothing. Whatever is perceived as means
for truth shares in its holiness and rests in light as safely as itself.
Nor will that light go out when it is gone. Its holy purpose gave it
immortality, setting another light in Heaven, where your creations
recognize a gift from you, a sign that you have not forgotten them.

<sup>67</sup> The test of everything on earth is simply this: “What is it *for*?”
The answer makes it what it is for you. It has no meaning of itself, yet
you can give reality to it according to the purpose which you serve.
Here you are but means, along with it. God is a Means as well as End. In
Heaven, means and end are one, and one with Him. This is the state of
true creation, found not within time, but in eternity. To no one here is
this describable. Nor is there any way to learn what this condition
means. Not till you go past learning to the Given; not till you make
again a holy home for your creations is it understood.

<sup>68</sup> A co-creator with the Father must have a Son. Yet must this Son have
been created like Himself. A perfect being, all-encompassing and
all-encompassed, nothing to add and nothing taken from—not born of size
nor weight nor time nor held to limits or uncertainties of any kind.
Here do the means and end unite as one, nor does this one have any end
at all. All this is true, and yet it has no meaning to anyone who still
retains one unlearned lesson in his memory, one thought with purpose
still uncertain, or one wish with a divided aim.

<sup>69</sup> This course makes no attempt to teach what cannot easily be learned.
Its scope does not exceed your own, except to say that what is yours
will come to you when you are ready. Here are the means and purpose
separate because they were so made and so perceived. And therefore do we
deal with them as if they were. It is essential it be kept in mind that
all perception still is upside down until its purpose has been
understood. Perception does not *seem* to be a means. And it is this
that makes it hard to grasp the whole extent to which it must depend on
what you see it *for*. Perception seems to *teach* you what you see. Yet
it but witnesses to what *you* taught. It is the outward picture of a
wish—an image that you *wanted* to be true.

<sup>70</sup> Look at yourself, and you will see a body. Look at this body in a
different light, and it looks different. And without a light, it seems
that it is gone. Yet you are reassured that it is there because you
still can feel it with your hands and hear it move. Here is an image
that you want to be yourself. It is the means to make your wish come
true. It gives the eyes with which you look on it, the hands that feel
it, and the ears with which you listened to the sounds it makes. It
*proves* its own reality to you.

<sup>71</sup> Thus is the body made a theory of yourself with no provisions made
for evidence beyond itself and no escape within its sight. Its course is
sure when seen through its own eyes. It grows and withers, flourishes
and dies. And you cannot conceive of you apart from it. You brand it
sinful, and you hate its acts, judging it evil. Yet your specialness
whispers, “Here is my own beloved son, in whom I am well pleased.” Thus
does the “son” become the means to serve his “father's” purpose. Not
identical, not even like, but still a means to offer to the “father”
what he *wants.* Such is the travesty on God's creation. For as His
Son's creation gave Him joy and witness to His love and shared His
purpose, so does the body testify to the idea that made it and speak for
its reality and truth.

<sup>72</sup> And thus are two sons made, and both appear to walk this earth
without a meeting-place and no encounter. One do you see outside
yourself, your own beloved son. The other rests within, His Father's
Son, within your brother as he is in you. Their difference does not lie
in how they look, nor where they go, nor even what they do. They have a
different *purpose.* It is this that joins them to their like and
separates each from all aspects with a different purpose. The Son of God
retains His Father's Will. The son of man perceives an alien will and
wishes it were so. And thus does his perception serve his wish by giving
it appearances of truth. Yet can perception serve another goal. It is
not bound to specialness but by your choice. And it *is* given you to
make a different choice and use perception for a different purpose. And
what you see will serve that purpose well and *prove* its own reality to
you.

