---
chapter: Twenty Four
ctitle: Specialness and Separation
title: The Resolution of the Dream
ref: Tx.24.VI
---

<sup>40</sup> The Christ in you is very still. He looks on what He loves and knows
it as Himself. And thus does He rejoice at what He sees because He knows
that it is one with Him and with His Father. Specialness, too, takes joy
in what it sees, although it is not true. Yet what you seek for *is* a
source of joy as you conceive it. What you wish is true for you. Nor is
it possible that you can wish for something and lack faith that it is
so. Wishing *makes* real, as surely as does will create. The power of a
wish upholds illusions as strongly as does love extend itself, except
that one deludes; the other heals.

<sup>41</sup> There is no dream of specialness—however hidden or disguised the
form; however lovely it may seem to be; however much it delicately
offers the hope of peace and the escape from pain—in which you suffer
not your condemnation. In dreams, effect and cause are interchanged, for
here the maker of the dream believes that what he made is happening to
him. He does not realize he picked a thread from here, a scrap from
there, and wove a picture out of nothing. For the parts do not belong
together, and the whole contributes nothing to the parts to give them
meaning.

<sup>42</sup> Where could your peace arise *but* from forgiveness? The Christ in
you looks only on the truth and sees no condemnation that could *need*
forgiveness. He is at peace *because* He sees no sin. Identify with Him,
and what has He that you have not? He is your eyes, your ears, your
hands, your feet. How gentle are the sights He sees, the sounds He
hears. How beautiful His hand that holds His brother's, and how lovingly
He walks beside him, showing him what can be seen and heard and where he
will see nothing and there is no sound to hear.

<sup>43</sup> Yet let your specialness direct his way, and *you* will follow. And
*both* will walk in danger, each intent, in the dark forest of the
sightless, unlit but by the shifting tiny gleams that spark an instant
from the fireflies of sin and then go out, to lead the other to a
nameless precipice and hurl him over it. For what can specialness
delight in but to kill? What does it seek for but the sight of death?
Where does it lead but to destruction? Yet think not that it looked upon
your brother first, nor hated him before it hated you. The sin its eyes
behold in him and love to look upon, it saw in *you* and looks on still
with joy. Yet *is* it joy to look upon decay and madness and believe
this crumbling thing, with flesh already loosened from the bone and
sightless holes for eyes, is like yourself?

<sup>44</sup> Rejoice you *have* no eyes with which to see, no ears to listen, and
no hands to hold nor feet to guide. Be glad that only Christ can lend
you His while you have need of them. They are illusions too, as much as
yours. And yet, because they serve a different purpose, the strength
their purpose holds is given them. And what they see and hear and hold
and lead is given light that you may lead as you were led.

<sup>45</sup> The Christ in you is very still. He knows where you are going, and He
leads you there in gentleness and blessing all the way. His love for God
replaces all the fear you thought you saw within yourself. His holiness
shows you Himself in him whose hand you hold and whom you lead to Him.
And what you see is like yourself. For what but Christ is there to see
and hear and love and follow home? He looked upon you first but
recognized that you were not complete. And so He sought for your
completion in each living thing that He beholds and loves. And seeks it
still, that each might offer you the love of God.

<sup>46</sup> Yet is He quiet, for He knows that love is in you now and safely held
in you by that same hand that holds your brother's in your own. Christ's
hand holds all His brothers in Himself. He gives them vision for their
sightless eyes and sings to them of Heaven that their ears may hear no
more the sound of battle and of death. He reaches through them, holding
out His hand that everyone may bless all living things and see their
holiness. And He rejoices that these sights are yours to look upon with
Him and share His joy. His perfect lack of specialness He offers you
that you may save all living things from death, receiving from each one
the gift of life that your forgiveness offers to your Self. The sight of
Christ is all there is to see. The song of Christ is all there is to
hear. The hand of Christ is all there is to hold. There *is* no journey
but to walk with Him.

<sup>47</sup> You who would be content with specialness and seek salvation in a war
with love, consider this: the holy Lord of Heaven has Himself come down
to you to offer you your own completion. What is His is yours because in
your completion is His Own. He Who willed not to be without His Son
could never will that you be brotherless. And would He give a brother
unto you except he be as perfect as yourself and just as like to Him in
holiness as *you* must be?

<sup>48</sup> There must be doubt before there can be conflict. And every doubt
must be about yourself. Christ has no doubt, and from His certainty His
quiet comes. He will exchange His certainty for all your doubts if you
agree that He is one with you and that this Oneness is endless,
timeless, and within your grasp *because* your hands are His. He is
within you, yet He walks beside you and before, leading the way that He
must go to find Himself complete. His quietness becomes your certainty.
And where is doubt when certainty has come?

