---
chapter: Twenty Four
ctitle: Specialness and Separation
title: Salvation from Fear
ref: Tx.24.VII
---

<sup>49</sup> Before your brother's holiness the world is still and peace descends
on it in gentleness and blessing so complete that not one trace of
conflict still remains to haunt you in the darkness of the night. He is
your savior from the dreams of fear. He is the healing of your sense of
sacrifice and fear that what you have will scatter with the wind and
turn to dust. In him is your assurance God is here and with you *now*.
While he is what he is, you can be sure that God is knowable and *will*
be known to you. For He could never leave His own creation. And the sign
that this is so lies in your brother, offered you that all your doubts
about yourself may disappear before his holiness. See in him God's
creation. For in him, his Father waits for your acknowledgment that He
created you as part of Him.

<sup>50</sup> Without you there would be a lack in God, a Heaven incomplete, a Son
without a Father. There could be no universe and no reality. For what
God wills is whole and part of Him because His Will is One. Nothing
alive that is not part of Him, and nothing *is* but is alive in Him.
Your brother's holiness shows you that God is one with him and you—that
what he has is yours *because* you are not separate from him nor from
his Father.

<sup>51</sup> Nothing is lost to you in all the universe. Nothing that God created
has He failed to lay before you lovingly as yours forever. And no
thought within His Mind is absent from your own. It is His Will you
share His love for you and look upon yourself as lovingly as He
conceived of you before the world began and as He knows you still. God
changes not His Mind about His Son with passing circumstance, which has
no meaning in eternity where He abides and you with Him. Your brother
*is* as He created him. And it is this that saves you from a world that
He created not.

<sup>52</sup> Forget not that the healing of God's Son is all the world is *for*.
That is the only purpose the Holy Spirit sees in it and thus the only
one it has. Until you see the healing of the Son as all you wish to be
accomplished by the world, by time, and all appearances, you will not
know the Father nor yourself. For you will use the world for what is not
its purpose and will not escape its laws of violence and death. Yet it
is given you to be beyond its laws in *all* respects, in *every* way,
and *every* circumstance, in *all* temptation to perceive what is not
there and *all* belief God's Son can suffer pain because he sees himself
as he is not.

<sup>53</sup> Look on your brother and behold in him the whole reversal of the laws
that seem to rule this world. See in his freedom *yours*, for such it
is. Let not his specialness obscure the truth in him, for not one law of
death you bind him to will *you* escape. And not one sin you see in him
but keeps you *both* in hell. Yet will his perfect sinlessness *release*
you both, for holiness is quite impartial, with one judgment made for
all it looks upon. And that is made, not of itself, but through the
Voice that speaks for God in everything that lives and shares His Being.

<sup>54</sup> It is *His* sinlessness that eyes which see can look upon. It is
*His* loveliness they see in everything. And it is *He* they look for
everywhere and find no sight nor place nor time where He is not. Within
your brother's holiness, the perfect frame for your salvation and the
world's, is set the shining memory of Him in Whom your brother lives and
you along with him. Let not your eyes be blinded by the veil of
specialness that hides the face of Christ from him, and you as well. And
let the fear of God no longer hold the vision you were meant to see from
you. Your brother's body shows not Christ to you. He *is* set forth
within his holiness.

<sup>55</sup> Choose, then, his body or his holiness as what you *want* to see, and
which you choose is yours to look upon. Yet will you choose in countless
situations and through time which seems to have no end until the truth
be your decision. For eternity is not regained by still one more denial
of Christ in him. And where is your salvation if he is but a body? Where
is your peace but in his holiness? And where is God Himself but in that
part of Him He set forever in your brother's holiness that you might see
the truth about yourself set forth at last in terms you recognized and
understood?

<sup>56</sup> Your brother's holiness is sacrament and benediction unto you. His
errors cannot withhold God's blessing from himself nor you who see him
truly. His mistakes can cause delay, which it is given you to take from
him that both may end a journey that has never been begun and needs no
end. What never was is not a part of you. Yet you will *think* it is
until you realize that it is not a part of him who stands beside you. He
is the mirror of yourself wherein you see the judgment you have laid on
both of you. The Christ in you beholds his holiness. Your specialness
looks on his body and beholds him not.

<sup>57</sup> See him as what he *is* that your deliverance may not be long. A
senseless wandering, without a purpose and without accomplishment of any
kind, is all the other choice can offer you. Futility of function not
fulfilled will haunt you while your brother lies asleep, till what has
been assigned to you is done and he is risen from the past. He who
condemned himself, and you as well, is given you to save from
condemnation along with you. And *both* shall see God's glory in His
Son, whom you mistook as flesh and bound to laws that have no power over
him at all.

<sup>58</sup> Would you not gladly realize these laws are not for you? Then see him
not as prisoner to them. It cannot be what governs part of God holds not
for all the rest. You place yourself under the laws you see as ruling
him. Think, then, how great the love of God for you must be that He has
given you a part of Him to save from pain and give you happiness. And
never doubt but that your specialness will disappear before the Will of
God, Who loves each part of Him with equal love \[and care\]. The Christ
in you *can* see your brother truly. Would *you* decide against the
holiness He sees?

<sup>59</sup> Specialness is the function which you gave yourself. It stands for
you alone, as self-created, self-maintained, in need of nothing, and
unjoined with anything beyond the body. In its eyes, you are a separate
universe with all the power to hold itself complete within itself, with
every entry shut against intrusion and every window barred against the
light. Always attacked and always furious, with anger always fully
justified, you have pursued this goal with vigilance you never thought
to yield and effort that you never thought to cease. And all this grim
determination was for this—you wanted specialness to be the *truth*.

<sup>60</sup> Now you are merely asked that you pursue another goal with far less
vigilance—with little effort and with little time and with the power of
God maintaining it and promising success. Yet of the two, it is *this*
one you find more difficult. The “sacrifice” of self you understand, nor
do you deem this cost too heavy. But a tiny willingness, a nod to God, a
greeting to the Christ in you, you find a burden wearisome and tedious,
too heavy to be borne. Yet to the dedication to the truth as God
established it no sacrifice is asked, no strain called forth, and all
the power of Heaven and the might of truth itself is given to provide
the means and *guarantee* the goal's accomplishment.

<sup>61</sup> You who believe it easier to see your brother's body than his
holiness, be sure you understand what made this judgment. Here is the
voice of specialness heard clearly, judging against the Christ and
setting forth for you the purpose that you can attain and what you
cannot do. Forget not that this judgment must apply to what you do with
*it* as your ally. For what you do through Christ it does not know. To
Him this judgment makes no sense at all, for only what His Father wills
is possible, and there is no alternative for Him to see. Out of His lack
of conflict comes your peace. And from His purpose comes the means for
effortless accomplishment and rest.

