---
chapter: Twenty Four
ctitle: Specialness and Separation
title: Specialness and Salvation
ref: Tx.24.V
---

<sup>34</sup> Specialness is a lack of trust in anyone except yourself. Faith is
invested in yourself alone. Everything else becomes your enemy—feared
and attacked, deadly and dangerous, hated and worthy only of
destruction. Whatever gentleness it offers is but deception, but its
hate is real. In danger of destruction, it must kill, and you are drawn
to it to kill it first. And such is guilt's attraction. Here is death
enthroned as savior; crucifixion is now redemption, and salvation can
only mean destruction of the world, except yourself.

<sup>35</sup> What could the purpose of the body *be* but specialness? And it is
this that makes it frail and helpless in its own defense. It was
conceived to make *you* frail and helpless. The goal of separation is
its curse. Yet bodies *have* no goal. Purpose is of the *mind*. And
minds can change as they desire. What they are and all their attributes,
they *cannot* change. But what they hold as purpose *can* be changed,
and body states must shift accordingly. Of itself the body can do
nothing. See it as means to hurt, and it is hurt. See it as means to
heal, and it is healed.

<sup>36</sup> You can but hurt *yourself*. This has been oft repeated but is
difficult to grasp as yet. To minds intent on specialness, it is
impossible. Yet to those who wish to heal and not attack, it is quite
obvious. The purpose of attack is in the *mind*, and its effects are
felt but where it *is*. Nor is mind limited; so must it be that harmful
purpose hurts the mind as one. Nothing could make *less* sense to
specialness. Nothing could make *more* sense to miracles. For miracles
are merely change of purpose from hurt to healing.

<sup>37</sup> This shift in purpose *does* “endanger” specialness, but only in the
sense that all illusions are “threatened” by the truth. They will *not*
stand before it. Yet what comfort has ever been in them that you would
keep the gift your Father asks from Him and give it there instead? Given
to *Him*, the universe is yours. Offered to *them*, no gifts can be
returned. What you have given specialness has left you bankrupt and your
treasure house barren and empty with an open door inviting everything
that would disturb your peace to enter and destroy.

<sup>38</sup> Long ago we said consider not the means by which salvation is
attained nor how to reach it. But *do* consider, and consider well,
whether it is your wish that you might see your brother sinless. To
specialness the answer must be “no.” A sinless brother *is* its enemy,
while sin, if it were possible, would be its friend. Your brother's sins
would justify itself and give it meaning that the truth denies. All that
is real proclaims his sinlessness. All that is false proclaims his sins
as real. If *he* is sinful, then is *your* reality not real but just a
dream of specialness which lasts an instant, crumbling into dust.

<sup>39</sup> Do not defend this senseless dream in which God is bereft of what He
loves and you remain beyond salvation. Only this is certain in this
shifting world which has no meaning in reality: when peace is not with
you entirely and when you suffer pain of any kind, you have beheld some
sin within your brother and have *rejoiced* at what you thought was
there. Your specialness seemed safe because of it. And thus you saved
what *you* appointed to be your savior and crucified the one whom God
has given you instead. So are you bound with him, for you *are* one. And
so is specialness his “enemy” and *yours* as well.

