---
chapter: Ten
ctitle: God and the Ego
title: The “Dynamics” of the Ego
ref: Tx.10.VI
---

<sup>39</sup> No one can escape from illusions unless he looks at them, for *not*
looking is the way they are *protected*. There is no need to shrink from
illusions, for they cannot be dangerous. We are ready to look more
closely at the ego's thought system because together we have the lamp
that will dispel it, and since you realize you do not *want* it, *you*
must be ready. Let us be very calm in doing this, for we are merely
looking honestly for truth. The “dynamics” of the ego will be our lesson
for a while, for we must look first at this to look beyond it since you
*have* made it real. We will *undo* this error quietly together and then
look beyond it to truth.

<sup>40</sup> What is healing but the removal of all that *stands in the way* of
knowledge? And how else can one dispel illusions *except* by looking at
them directly *without* protecting them? Be not afraid, therefore, for
what you will be looking at *is* the source of fear, but you have surely
learned by now that *fear* is not real. We have accepted the fact
already that its *effects* can be dispelled merely by denying their
reality. The next step is obviously to recognize that what has no
effects *does not exist.* Laws do not operate in a vacuum, and what
leads to nothing *has not happened*. If reality is recognized by its
*extension*, what extends to nothing cannot *be* real.

<sup>41</sup> Do not be afraid, then, to look upon fear, for it cannot *be* seen.
Clarity undoes confusion by definition, and to look upon darkness
through light *must* dispel it. Let us begin this lesson in “ego
dynamics” by understanding that the term itself does not mean anything.
In fact, it contains exactly the contradiction in terms which *makes* it
meaningless. “Dynamics” implies the power to *do* something, and the
whole separation *fallacy* lies in the belief that the ego has the power
to do *anything*. The ego is fearful to you *because* you believe this.
Yet the truth is very simple:

<sup>42</sup> *<strong>All power is of God</strong>. What is **not** of Him has no power
to do **anything.***

<sup>43</sup> When we look at the ego, then, we are not considering dynamics but
delusions. We can surely regard a delusional system without fear, for it
cannot have any effects if its source is not true. Fear becomes more
obviously inappropriate if one recognizes the ego's *goal*, which is so
clearly senseless that any effort exerted on its behalf is *necessarily*
expended on nothing. The ego's goal is quite explicitly ego *autonomy*.
From the beginning, then, its *purpose* is to be separate, sufficient
unto itself, and independent of any power *except* its own. This is
*why* it is the symbol of separation.

<sup>44</sup> Every idea has a purpose, and its purpose is always the natural
extension of what it *is*. Everything that stems from the ego is the
natural outcome of its central belief, and the way to undo its *results*
is merely to recognize that their *source* is not natural, being out of
accord with your *true* nature. We once said that to will contrary to
God is wishful thinking and not real willing. His Will is one because
the extension of His Will cannot be unlike itself. The real conflict you
experience, then, is between the ego's idle wishes and the Will of God,
which you share. Can this *be* a real conflict?

<sup>45</sup> Yours is the independence of creation, *not* of autonomy. Your whole
creative function lies in your complete *dependence* on God, Whose
function He shares with *you*. By *His* Willingness to share it, He
became as dependent on you as you are on *Him*. Do not ascribe the ego's
arrogance to Him, Who wills not to be independent of *you.* He has
*included* you in His Autonomy. Can *you* believe that autonomy is
meaningful *apart* from Him? The belief in *ego* autonomy is costing you
the knowledge of your dependence on God *in which your freedom lies*.
The ego sees *all* dependency as threatening and has twisted even your
longing for God into a means of establishing *itself*. But do not be
deceived by *its* interpretation of your conflict.

<sup>46</sup> The ego *always* attacks on behalf of separation. Believing it has
the power to do this, it does nothing else because its goal of autonomy
*is* nothing else. The ego is totally confused about reality, but it
does *not* lose sight of its goal. It is much more vigilant than *you*
are because it is perfectly certain of its purpose. *You* are confused
because you do *not* know *yours*.

<sup>47</sup> What you must learn to recognize is that the *last* thing the ego
wishes you to realize is that *you are afraid of it.* For if the ego
gives rise to fear, it is *diminishing* your independence and
*weakening* your power. Yet its one claim to your allegiance is that it
can *give* power to you. Without this belief, you would not listen to it
at all. How, then, can its existence continue if you realize that, *by*
accepting it, you *are* belittling yourself and *depriving* yourself of
power?

<sup>48</sup> The ego can and does allow you to regard yourself as supercilious,
unbelieving, “light-hearted,” distant, emotionally shallow, callous,
uninvolved, and even desperate, but *not really afraid. Minimizing* fear
but *not* its undoing is the ego's constant effort and is indeed the
skill at which it is very ingenious. How can it preach separation
*without* upholding it through fear, and would you listen to it if you
recognized this *is* what it is doing?

<sup>49</sup> *Your* recognition that whatever seems to separate you from God is
*only* fear, regardless of the form it takes and quite apart from how
the *ego* wants you to experience it, is therefore the basic ego threat.
Its dream of autonomy is shaken to its foundation by this awareness. For
though you may countenance a false idea of independence, you will *not*
accept the cost of fear *if you recognize it*. Yet this *is* the cost,
and the ego *cannot* minimize it. For if you overlook love, you are
overlooking *yourself*, and you *must* fear unreality *because* you have
denied yourself. By believing that you have successfully *attacked*
truth, you are believing that attack has *power.* Very simply, then, you
have become afraid of *yourself*. And no one wills to learn what he
believes would destroy him.

<sup>50</sup> If the ego's goal of autonomy could be accomplished, God's purpose
could be defeated, and this *is* impossible. Only by learning what fear
*is*, can you finally learn to distinguish the possible from the
impossible and the false from the true. According to the ego's teaching,
*its* goal can be accomplished, and God's purpose can *not*. According
to the Holy Spirit's teaching, *only* God's purpose is accomplishment,
and it is *already* accomplished.

<sup>51</sup> God is as dependent on you as you are on Him because His autonomy
*encompasses* yours and is therefore incomplete *without* it. You can
only establish your autonomy by identifying *with* Him and fulfilling
your function *as it exists in truth*. The ego believes that to
accomplish *its* goal is happiness. But it is given *you* to know that
God's function *is* yours and happiness cannot be found apart from your
*joint* will. Recognize only that the ego's goal, which you have pursued
quite diligently, has \[only\] brought you *fear*, and it becomes
difficult to maintain that fear *is* happiness.

<sup>52</sup> *Upheld* by fear, this *is* what the ego would have you believe. Yet
God's Son is not insane and *cannot* believe it. Let him but *recognize*
it, and he will *not* accept it. For only the insane would choose fear
*in place* of love, and only the insane could believe that love can be
gained by attack. But the sane know that only attack could produce
*fear* from which the love of God completely protects them.

<sup>53</sup> The ego analyzes; the Holy Spirit *accepts*. The appreciation of
wholeness comes *only* through acceptance, for to analyze means to
separate out. The attempt to understand totality by breaking it up is
clearly the characteristically contradictory approach of the ego to
everything. Never forget that the ego believes that power,
understanding, and *truth* lie in separation, and to *establish* this
belief it *must* attack. Unaware that the belief cannot *be* established
and obsessed with the conviction that separation *is* salvation, the ego
attacks everything it perceives by breaking it up into small and
disconnected parts without meaningful relationships and thus without
meaning. The ego will *always* substitute chaos for meaning, for if
separation is salvation, harmony is threat.

<sup>54</sup> The ego's interpretation of the laws of perception are, and would
*have* to be, the exact opposite of the Holy Spirit's. The ego focuses
on *error* and overlooks *truth*. It makes real *every* mistake it
perceives, and with characteristically circular reasoning concludes
that, *because* of the mistake, consistent truth must be meaningless.
The next step, then, is obvious. If consistent truth is meaningless,
*inconsistency* must be true if truth has meaning. Holding error clearly
in mind and protecting what it has made real, the ego proceeds to the
next step in its thought system—that error is real, and *truth is
error*.

<sup>55</sup> The ego makes no attempt to understand this, and it is clearly *not*
understandable, but the ego does make *every* attempt to *demonstrate
it*, and this it does constantly. Analyzing to attack meaning, the ego
*does* succeed in overlooking it and is left with a series of fragmented
perceptions which it unifies on behalf of *itself.* This, then, becomes
the universe it perceives. And it is this universe which, in turn,
becomes its demonstration of its own reality.

<sup>56</sup> Do not underestimate the appeal of the ego's demonstrations to those
who would listen. Selective perception chooses its witnesses carefully,
and its witnesses *are* consistent. The case for insanity *is* strong to
the insane. For reasoning ends at its beginning, and no thought system
transcends its source. Yet reasoning without meaning *cannot*
demonstrate anything, and those who are convinced by it *must* be
deluded. Can the ego teach truly when it *overlooks* truth? Can it
perceive what it has *denied?* Its witnesses *do* attest to its denial
but hardly to what it has denied! The ego looks straight at the Father
and does not see Him, for it has denied His Son.

<sup>57</sup> Would *you* remember the Father? Accept His Son, and you *will*
remember Him. Nothing can demonstrate that His Son is unworthy, for
nothing can prove that a lie is true. What you see of His Son through
the eyes of the ego is a demonstration that His Son does not exist, yet
where the Son is, the Father *must* be. Accept what God does *not* deny,
and *He* will demonstrate its truth. The witnesses for God stand in His
light and behold what *He* created. Their silence is the sign that they
have beheld God's Son, and in the Presence of Christ they need
demonstrate nothing, for Christ speaks to them of Himself and of His
Father. They are silent because Christ speaks to them, and it is His
words that *they* speak.

<sup>58</sup> Every brother you meet becomes a witness for Christ or for the ego,
depending on what you perceive in him. Everyone convinces you of what
you *want* to perceive and of the reality of the kingdom you have chosen
for your vigilance. Everything you perceive is a witness to the thought
system you *want* to be true. Every brother has the power to release you
*if you will to be free*. You cannot accept false witness of *him*
unless you have evoked false witnesses *against* him. If *he* speaks not
of Christ to you, *you* spoke not of Christ to him. You hear but your
*own* voice, and if Christ speaks *through* you, *you* will hear Him.

