---
chapter: Ten
ctitle: God and the Ego
title: Projection versus Extension
ref: Tx.10.II
---

<sup>3</sup> You have made by projection, but God has created by extension. The
cornerstone of God's creation is *you*, for His thought system is light.
Remember the rays that are there unseen. The more you approach the
center of His thought system, the clearer the light becomes. The closer
you come to \[the foundation of\] the ego's thought system, the darker
and more obscure becomes the way. Yet even the little spark in your mind
is enough to lighten it. Bring this light fearlessly with you and hold
it up to the foundation of the ego's thought system bravely. Be willing
to judge it with perfect honesty. Open the dark cornerstone of terror on
which it rests and bring it out into the light. There you will see that
it rests on meaninglessness and that everything of which you have been
afraid was based on nothing.

<sup>4</sup> My brother, you are part of God and part of me. When you have at last
looked at the ego's foundation without shrinking, you will also have
looked upon *ours*. I come to you from our Father to offer you
everything again. Do not refuse it in order to keep a dark cornerstone
hidden, for *its* protection will not save you. I *give* you the lamp
and I will go *with* you. You will not take this journey alone. I will
lead you to your true Father, Who hath need of you as I have. Will you
not answer the call of love with joy?

<sup>5</sup> You have learned your need of healing. Would you bring anything *else*
to the Sonship, recognizing your need of healing for yourself? For in
this lies the beginning of knowledge, the foundation on which God will
help you build again the thought system which you share with *Him*. Not
one stone you place upon it but will be blessed by Him, for you will be
restoring the holy dwelling place of His Son, where He wills His Son to
be and where he *is*. In whatever part of the Mind of God's Son you
restore this reality, you restore it to *yourself*. For you dwell in the
Mind of God *with* your brother, for God Himself did not will to be
alone.

<sup>6</sup> To be alone is to be separated from infinity, but how can this be if
infinity has no end? No one can be *beyond* the limitless because what
has no limits must be everywhere. There are no beginnings and no endings
in God, Whose universe is Himself. Can you exclude yourself from the
universe or from God, Who *is* the universe? I and my Father are one
with *you*, for you are part of *us*. Do you really believe that part of
God can be missing or lost to Him?

<sup>7</sup> If you were not part of God, His Will would not be unified. Is this
conceivable? Can part of His Mind contain nothing? If your place in His
Mind cannot be filled by anyone *except* you, and your filling it *was*
your creation, *without* you there would be an empty place in God's
Mind. Extension cannot be blocked, and it *has* no voids. It continues
forever, however much it is denied. Your denial of its reality arrests
it in time but *not* in eternity. That is why your creations have not
ceased to be extended and why so much is waiting for your return.

<sup>8</sup> Waiting is possible *only* in time, but time has no meaning. You who
made delay can leave time behind simply by recognizing that neither
beginnings nor endings were created by the Eternal, Who placed no limits
on His creation nor upon those who create like Him. You do not know this
simply because you have tried to limit what *He* created, and so you
believe that *all* creation is limited. How, then, could you know your
creations, having *denied* infinity? The laws of the universe do not
permit contradiction. What holds for God holds for *you*. If you believe
*you* are absent from God, you *will* believe that He is absent from
*you*.

<sup>9</sup> Infinity is meaningless *without* you, and *you* are meaningless
without God. There *is* no end to God and His Son, for we *are* the
universe. God is not incomplete, and He is not childless. Because He did
not will to be alone, He created a Son like Himself. Do not deny Him His
Son, for your unwillingness to accept His Fatherhood has denied you
*yours*. See His creations as *His* Son, for yours were created in honor
of Him. The universe of love does not stop because you do not see it,
and your closed eyes have not lost the ability to see. Look upon the
glory of His creation, and you will learn what God has *kept* for you.

<sup>10</sup> God has given you a place in His Mind which is yours forever. Yet you
could keep it only by *giving* it, as it was given *you.* Could *you* be
alone there if it was given you because God did not will to be alone?
God's Mind cannot *be* lessened. It can *only* be increased, and
everything He creates has the function of creating. Love does not limit,
and what it creates is not limited. To give without limit is God's Will
for you because only this can bring you the joy which is His and which
He wills to *share* with you. Your love is as boundless as His because
it *is* His.

<sup>11</sup> Could any part of God be *without* His love and could any part of His
love be contained? God is your heritage because His one gift is Himself.
How can you give except like Him if you would know His gift to *you*?
Give, then, without limit and without end to learn how much *He* has
given *you*. Your ability to *accept* Him depends on your willingness to
give as He gives. Your fatherhood and your Father *are* one. God willed
to create, and your will is His. It follows, then, that *you* will to
create since your will follows from His. And being an extension of His
Will, yours must be the same.

<sup>12</sup> Yet what you will you do not know. This is not strange when you
realize that to deny is to “*not* know.” God's Will is that you are His
Son. By denying this, you denied your *own* will and therefore do *not*
know what it is. The reason you must ask what God's Will is in
everything is merely because it *is* yours. You do not know what it is,
but the Holy Spirit remembers it *for* you. Ask Him, therefore, what
God's Will is for you, and He will tell you *yours.* It cannot be too
often repeated that you do *not* know it. Whenever what the Holy Spirit
tells you appears to be coercive, it is only because you do not
*recognize* your own will.

<sup>13</sup> The projection of the ego makes it appear as if God's Will is
*outside* yourself and therefore *not* yours. In this interpretation, it
*is* possible for God's Will and yours to conflict. God then may *seem*
to demand of you what you do not want to give and thus deprive you of
what you want. Would God, who wants *only* your will, be capable of
this? Your will is His Life, which He has given to you. Even in time you
cannot live apart from Him, for sleep is not death. What He created can
sleep, but it *cannot* die. Immortality is His Will for His Son and His
Son's will for *himself*. God's Son cannot will death for himself
because His Father is Life and His Son is like Him. Creation is your
will *because* it is His.

<sup>14</sup> You cannot be happy unless you do what you will truly, and you cannot
change this because it is immutable. It is immutable by God's Will *and
yours*, for otherwise His Will would not have been extended. You are
afraid to know God's Will because you believe it is *not* yours. This
belief is your whole sickness and your whole fear. Every symptom of
sickness and fear arises here because this is the belief that makes you
*want* not to know. Believing this, you hide in darkness, denying that
the light is in you.

<sup>15</sup> You are asked to trust the Holy Spirit only because He speaks for
*you*. He is the Voice for God, but never forget that God did not will
to be alone. He *shares* His Will with you; He does not thrust it *upon*
you. Always remember that what He gives, He holds, so that nothing He
gives can contradict Him. You who share His Life must share it to know
it, for sharing *is* knowing. Blessed are you who learn that to hear the
Will of your Father is to know your *own.* For it is *your* will to be
like Him, Whose Will it is that it be so. God's Will is that His Son be
one, and united with Him in His Oneness. That is why healing is the
beginning of the recognition that your will *is* His.

