---
chapter: Ten
ctitle: God and the Ego
title: The Inheritance of God’s Son
ref: Tx.10.V
---

<sup>31</sup> Never forget that the Sonship is your salvation, for the Sonship is
your Soul. As God's creation, it is yours, and belonging to you, it is
His. Your Soul does not need salvation, but your mind needs to learn
what salvation *is*. You are not saved *from* anything, but you are
saved *for* glory. Glory is your inheritance, given your Soul by its
Creator that you might *extend* it. Yet if you hate part of your own
Soul, *all* your understanding is lost because you are looking on what
God created as *yourself* without love. And since what He created is
part of Him, you are denying Him His place in His own altar.

<sup>32</sup> Could you try to make God homeless and know that *you* are at home?
Can the Son deny the Father *without* believing that the Father has
denied *him*? God's laws hold only for your protection, and they never
hold in vain. What you experience when you deny your Father is still for
your protection, for the power of your will cannot be lessened without
the intervention of God *against* it, and any limitation on your power
is not the Will of God. Therefore, look *only* to the power that God
gave to save you, remembering that it is yours *because* it is His, and
join with your brothers in His peace.

<sup>33</sup> The peace of your Soul lies in its limitlessness. Limit the peace you
share, and your own Soul *must* be unknown to you. Every altar to God is
part of your Soul because the light He created is one with Him. Would
you cut off a brother from the light that is yours? You would not do so
if you realized that you can only darken your *own* mind. As you bring
*him* back, so will *your* mind return. That is the law of God for the
protection of the wholeness of His Son.

<sup>34</sup> *Only you can deprive yourself of anything*. Do not oppose this
realization, for it is truly the beginning of the dawn of light.
Remember also that the denial of this simple fact takes many forms, and
these you must learn to recognize and to oppose steadfastly and *without
exception*. This is a crucial step in the reawakening. The beginning
phases of this reversal are often quite painful for, as blame is
withdrawn from without, there is a strong tendency to harbor it within.
It is difficult at first to realize that this is *exactly* the same
thing, for there *is* no distinction between within and without.

<sup>35</sup> If your brothers are part of you and you blame *them* for your
deprivation, you *are* blaming yourself. And you cannot blame yourself
*without* blaming them. That is why blame must be undone, *not*
re-allocated. Lay it to yourself and you cannot *know* yourself, for
*only* the ego blames at all. Self-blame is therefore ego identification
and as strong an ego defense as blaming others. *You cannot enter God's
Presence if you attack His Son*. When His Son lifts his voice in praise
of his Creator, he *will* hear the Voice of his Father. Yet the Creator
cannot be praised *without* His Son, for their glory is shared, and they
are glorified together.

<sup>36</sup> Christ is at God's altar, waiting to welcome His Son. But come wholly
without condemnation, for otherwise you will believe that the door is
barred and you cannot enter. The door is *not* barred, and it is
impossible for you to be unable to enter the place where God would have
you be. But love yourself with the love of Christ, for so does your
Father love you. You can *refuse* to enter, but you *cannot* bar the
door which Christ holds open. Come unto me who holds it open *for* you,
for while I live it cannot be shut, and I live forever. God is my life
*and yours*, and nothing is denied by God to His Son.

<sup>37</sup> At God's altar Christ waits for the restoration of Himself in *you.*
God knows His Son as wholly blameless as Himself, and He is approached
through the appreciation of His Son. Christ waits for your acceptance of
Him as *yourself* and of His wholeness as *yours*. For Christ is the Son
of God who lives in his Creator and shines with His glory. Christ is the
extension of the love and the loveliness of God, as perfect as his
Creator and at peace with Him.

<sup>38</sup> Blessed is the Son of God, whose radiance is of his Father and whose
glory he wills to share as his Father shares it with him. There is no
condemnation in the Son, for there is no condemnation in the Father.
Sharing the perfect love of the Father, the Son must share what belongs
to Him, for otherwise he will not know the Father *or* the Son. Peace be
unto you who rest in God and in whom the whole Sonship rests.

