---
chapter: Ten
ctitle: God and the Ego
title: The Problem and the Answer
ref: Tx.10.VIII
---

<sup>69</sup> The world as *you* perceive it cannot have been created by the
Father, for the world is *not* as you see it. God created *only* the
eternal, and everything you see is perishable. Therefore, there must be
another world which you do *not* see. The Bible speaks of a *new* Heaven
and a *new* earth, yet this cannot be literally true, for the eternal
are not *re*\-created. To perceive *anew* is merely to perceive *again*,
implying that before, or in the interval, you were not perceiving *at
all*. What, then, is the world that awaits your perception when you
*see* it?

<sup>70</sup> Every loving thought that the Son of God ever had is eternal. Those
which his mind perceived in this world are the world's *only* reality.
They are still perceptions because he still believes that he is
separate. Yet they are eternal because they are loving. And being
loving, they are like the Father and therefore cannot die. The real
world can *actually be perceived*. All that is necessary is a
willingness to perceive nothing *else.* For if you perceive both good
*and* evil, you are accepting both the false *and* the true *and making
no distinction between them.*

<sup>71</sup> The ego sees *some* good but never *only* good. That is why its
perceptions are so variable. It does not reject goodness entirely, for
that you could not accept, but it always adds something that is *not*
real to the real, *thus confusing illusion and reality*. For perceptions
cannot be partly true. If you believe in truth *and* illusion, you
cannot tell *which* is true. To establish your *personal* autonomy, you
tried to create unlike your Father, believing what you made to be
capable of *being* unlike Him. Yet everything in what you have made that
*is* true *is* like Him. Only this is the real world, and perceiving
*only* this will lead you to the real Heaven because it will make you
capable of *understanding* it.

<sup>72</sup> The perception of goodness is not knowledge, but the denial of the
*opposite* of goodness enables you to perceive a condition in which
opposites do not exist. And this *is* the condition of knowledge.
*Without* this awareness, you have not met its conditions, and until you
do you will not know that it is yours already. You have made many ideas
which you have placed between yourselves and your Creator, and these
beliefs are the world as you perceive it. Truth is not absent here, but
it *is* obscure. You do not know the difference between what you have
made and what God created, and so you do not know the difference between
what you have made and what *you* have created.

<sup>73</sup> To believe that you can perceive the real world is to believe that
you can know yourself. You can know God because it is His Will to *be*
known. The real world is all that the Holy Spirit has saved for you out
of what you have made, and to perceive only this is salvation because it
is the recognition that reality is *only* what is true.

<sup>74</sup> This is a very simple course. Perhaps you do not feel that a course
which, in the end, teaches nothing more than that only reality is true
is necessary. *But do you believe it*? When you have perceived the real
world, you will recognize that you did *not* believe it. Yet the
swiftness with which your new and *only* real perception will be
translated into knowledge will leave you only an instant to realize that
this judgment is true.

<sup>75</sup> And then everything you made will be forgotten, the good and the bad,
the false and the true. For as Heaven and earth become one, even the
real world will vanish from your sight. The end of the world is not its
destruction, but its *translation* into Heaven. The re-interpretation of
the world is the transfer of *all* perception to knowledge. The Bible
tells you to become as little children. Little children recognize that
they do not understand what they perceive, and so they *ask* what it
means. Do not make the mistake of believing that *you* understand what
you perceive, for its meaning is lost to you. Yet the Holy Spirit has
saved its meaning *for* you, and if you will *let* Him interpret it for
you, He will restore what you have thrown away. As long as you think
*you* know its meaning, you will see no need to ask it of Him.

<sup>76</sup> You do not know the meaning of *anything* you perceive. *Not one
thought you hold is wholly true*. The recognition of this is your firm
beginning. You are not misguided; you have accepted no guide at all.
Instruction in perception is your great need, for you understand
nothing. Recognize this but do not *accept* it, for understanding is
your inheritance. Perceptions are learned, and you are not without a
Teacher. Yet your willingness to learn of Him depends on your
willingness to question *everything* you have learned of yourself, for
you who have learned amiss should not be your own teachers.

<sup>77</sup> No one can withhold truth except from himself. Yet God will not
refuse the answer He *gave* you. Ask, then, for what is yours but which
you did not make, and do not defend yourself *against* truth. *You* made
the problem which God has answered. Ask yourselves, therefore, but one
simple question—

<sup>78</sup> *Do I want the problem, or do I want the answer?*  

<sup>79</sup> Decide for the answer and you will have it, for you will see it as it
is, and it is yours already.

<sup>80</sup> You complain that this course is not sufficiently specific for you to
understand it and *use* it. Yet it has been *very* specific, and you
have *not* done what it specifically advocates. This is not a course in
the play of ideas, but in their *practical application*. Nothing could
be more specific than to be told very clearly that if you ask you *will*
receive. The Holy Spirit will answer *every* specific problem as long as
you believe that problems *are* specific. His answer is both many and
one, as long as you believe that the one *is* many. Realize that you are
*afraid* of His specificity for fear of what you think it will *demand*
of you. Yet only by asking will you learn that nothing that is of God
demands *anything* of you. God *gives*; He does *not* take.

<sup>81</sup> You are refusing to ask because you believe that asking is *taking*,
and you do *not* perceive it as sharing. The Holy Spirit will give you
only what is yours and will take *nothing* in return. For what is yours
*is* everything, and you share it with God. This *is* its reality. Would
the Holy Spirit, Who wills only to *restore*, be capable of
misinterpreting the question you must ask to learn His answer?

<sup>82</sup> You *have* heard the answer, but you have misunderstood the
*question.* You have believed that to ask for guidance of the Holy
Spirit is to ask for *deprivation*. Little Children of God, you do not
understand your Father. You believe in a world that takes, because you
believe that you can *get* by taking. And *by* that perception, you have
lost sight of the real world. You are afraid of the world as *you* see
it, but the real world is still yours for the asking. Do not deny it to
yourself, for it can *only* free you. Nothing of God will enslave His
Son, whom He created free and whose freedom is protected by His Being.

<sup>83</sup> Blessed are you who will ask the truth of God without fear, for only
thus can you learn that His answer *is* the release from fear. Beautiful
Child of God, you are asking only for what I promised you. Do you
believe I would deceive you? The Kingdom of Heaven *is* within you.
Believe that the truth is in me, for I *know* that it is in *you*. God's
Sons have nothing which they do not share. Ask for truth of any Son of
God, and you have asked it of me. No one of us but has the answer in
him, to give to anyone who asks it of him. Ask anything of God's Son and
His Father will answer you, for Christ is not deceived in His Father,
and His Father is not deceived in Him.

<sup>84</sup> Do not, then, be deceived in your brother and see only his loving
thoughts as his reality, for by denying that *his* mind is split, you
will heal *yours*. Accept him as his Father accepts him and heal him
unto Christ, for Christ is his healing *and* yours. Christ is the Son of
God, who is in no way separate from His Father, whose *every* thought is
as loving as the Thought of His Father by which He was created. Be not
deceived in God's Son, for thereby you *must* be deceived in yourself.
And being deceived in yourself, you *are* deceived in your Father in
Whom no deceit is possible.

<sup>85</sup> In the real world there is no sickness, for there is no separation
and no division. Only loving thoughts are recognized, and because no one
is *without* your help, the Help of God goes with *you* everywhere. As
you become willing to *accept* this Help by *asking* for it, you will
give it because you *want* it. Nothing will be beyond your healing power
because nothing will be denied your simple request. What problems will
not disappear in the presence of God's answer? Ask, then, to learn of
the reality of your brother because this is what you *will* perceive in
him, and you will see *your* beauty reflected in him.

<sup>86</sup> Do not accept your brother's variable perception of himself, for his
split mind is yours, and you will not accept *your* healing without his.
For you share the real world as you share Heaven, and his healing *is*
yours. To love yourself is to *heal* yourself, and you cannot perceive
part of you as sick and achieve your *own* goal. Brother, we heal
together as we live together and love together. Be not deceived in God's
Son, for he is one with himself and one with his Father. Love him who is
beloved of His Father, and you will learn of the Father's love for
*you.*

<sup>87</sup> If you perceive offense in a brother, pluck the offense from your
mind, for you are offended by Christ and are deceived in Him. *Heal* in
Christ and be not offended by Him, for there *is* no offense in Him. If
what you perceive offends you, you are offended in *yourself* and are
condemning God's Son, whom God condemneth not. Let the Holy Spirit
remove *all* offense of God's Son against himself and perceive no one
but through His guidance, for He would save you from *all* condemnation.
Accept His healing power and use it for all He sends you, for He wills
to heal the Son of God in whom He is not deceived.

<sup>88</sup> Children perceive terrifying ghosts and monsters and dragons, and
they are terrified. Yet if they ask someone they trust for the *real*
meaning of what they perceive and are willing to let their
interpretations go in *favor* of reality, their fear goes with them.
When a child is helped to translate his “ghost” into a curtain, his
“monster” into a shadow, and his “dragon” into a dream, he is no longer
afraid and laughs happily at his own fear. You, my children, are afraid
of your brothers and of your Father and of *yourselves.* But you are
merely *deceived* in them.

<sup>89</sup> Ask what they *are* of the Teacher of Reality, and hearing His
answer, you too will laugh at your fears and replace them with peace.
For fear lies not in reality, but in the minds of children who do not
understand reality. It is only their *lack* of understanding which
frightens them, and when they learn to perceive truly, they are not
afraid. And because of this, they will ask for truth again when they are
frightened. It is not the *reality* of your brothers or your Father or
yourself which frightens you. You do not know what they *are*, and so
you perceive them as ghosts and monsters and dragons. *Ask* of their
reality from the One who knows it, and He will *tell* you what they are.
For you do not understand them, and because you are deceived by what you
see, you *need* reality to dispel your fears.

<sup>90</sup> Would you not exchange your fears for truth if the exchange is yours
for the asking? For if God is not deceived in you, you can be deceived
only in *yourself.* Yet you can learn the truth of yourself of the Holy
Spirit, who will teach you that, as part of God, deceit in *you* is
impossible. When you perceive yourself without deceit, you will accept
the real world in place of the false one you have made. And then your
Father will lean down to you and take the last step for you by raising
you unto Himself.

